The following is a conversation with Andrew Huberman, his second
time in the podcast. He's a neuroscientist at Stanford, a
world class researcher and educator. And now he has a new
podcast on YouTube, and all the usual places called Huberman
Lab, that I can't recommend highly enough. Quick mention of our
sponsors, masterclass online courses for systematic mushroom
coffee, magic spoon low carb cereal, and better help online
therapy, click the sponsor links to get a discount. By the way,
masterclass is testing to see if they want to support this
podcast long term. So if you're on the fence, now is the time to
sign up. And I'm pretty sure Andrew will have a neuroscience
masterclass on there soon enough, though his podcast is
basically a weekly masterclass in itself. As a side note, let me
say that Andrew is a friend and a new collaborator. We're working
on a paper together about a topic we're both really passionate
about. At the intersection of neuroscience and machine
learning. But that's probably many months away from being
published. Still, I'm really excited about this work. He's
one of the smartest and kindest people I have the pleasure of
talking to on this podcast. So I hope we'll talk many more
times in the future. If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on
YouTube, review it and have a podcast, follow on Spotify,
support on Patreon or connect with me on Twitter at Lex
Friedman. And now here's my conversation with Andrew Huberman. Why
do humans need sleep? Let's go with a big first question.
Okay, well, the answer I'll start with is the one that I always
default to when there's a why question. I wasn't consulted at
the design phase. So, so, so I wriggle my way out of giving a
absolute answer, right? But there's one mechanism that's very
clear. That's super important, which is that the longer we are
awake, the more adenosine accumulates in our brain. And
adenosine binds to adenosine receptors. No surprise there.
And it creates the feeling of sleepiness, independent of time
of day or night. So there are two mechanisms. One is we get
sleepy. As adenosine accumulates, the longer we've been awake,
the more adenosine is accumulated in our system. But how sleepy we
get for a given amount of adenosine depends on where we
are in this so called circadian cycle. And the circadian cycle
is just this very, very well conserved oscillation. It's a
temperature oscillation, where you go from a low point,
typically, if you're awake during the day and you're asleep at
night, your lowest temperature point will be like 3am, 4am,
and then your temperature will start to creep up as you wake
up in the morning, and then it'll peak in the late afternoon,
and then it'll start to drop again toward the evening, and
then you get sleep again. That oscillation in temperature
takes 24 hours, plus or minus an hour. And I don't even though
I wasn't consulted at the design phase, I do not think it's a
coincidence that it's aligned to the 24 hour spin of the earth on
its axis, and the fact that we tend to be bathed in sunlight for
a portion of that spin, and in darkness for the other portion
of that spin. So there are two mechanisms, the adenosine
accumulation and the circadian time point that we happen to be
at. And those converge to create a sense of sleepiness,
awakefulness. The simple way to reveal these two mechanisms to
uncouple them is stay up for 24 hours, and you will find that
even though you've been, let's say you stay up midnight, two
AM, three AM, provided you're on a regular schedule, like that I
follow, not like the kind that you follow, you get, I will get
very sleepy around three, four AM. But then around five or six
or seven AM, which is my normal wake up time, I'll start to
feel more alert, even though adenosine has been accumulating
further. So adenosine is higher for me the longer I stay up,
and yet I feel more alert than I did a few hours ago. And
that's because these are two interacting forces. So adenosine
makes you sleepy. And then just how sleepy or how awake you
feel also depends on where you are in this temperature
oscillation that takes 24 hours.
Okay, so that's fascinating. So there's a bunch of
oscillations going on. And then it kind of through the
evolutionary process have evolved to all be aligned
somewhat, and they interplay. So you said your body
temperature goes up and down. Those chemicals in your brain
that oscillate. And then there's the actual oscillation of
the, the sun in the in the sky. So all of that together has
some impact on each other. And somehow that all results in us
wanting to go to sleep every night.
Right. So, and we can get right into the meat of this. I
guess we just dove right in. But the, so that the temperature
oscillation is the effector of the circadian clock. So every cell
in our body has a 24 hour rhythm that's dictated by genes
like clock per BMAL. This is one of the great successes of
biology. They give a Nobel Prize to the repert and I don't
know if repert got it, forgive me. But sorry, if you got it,
Steve, congratulations. If you didn't, I'm sorry, I wasn't on
the committee. Nonetheless, did beautiful work Steve repert
and others. But Mike Roshbosh and like other people worked out
these mechanisms and flies and bacteria and mammals, there are
these genes that create 24 hour oscillations in gene expression,
et cetera, in every cell of our body. But what aligns those is
a signal from the master circadian clock, which sits
right above the roof of the mouth called the super charismatic
nucleus. And that clock synchronizes all the clocks of
the body to this general temperature rhythm by way of
controlling systemic temperature, which makes perfect
sense. If you want to create a general oscillation in all the
tissues and organs of the body, use temperature. And so that
work on temperature, if you want to explore it further was Joe
Takahashi, who was at Northwestern now at UT Southwestern
in Dallas. And it is absolutely clear that humans do better on
a diurnal schedule, sorry, Lex, than a nocturnal schedule,
because you could say, well, provided I sleep and push a
denticing back downhill, which is what happens when we sleep,
a denticing that is then reduced, and provided I am on more
or less a 24 hour schedule, why should it matter that I'm awake
when the sun's out? And, and I'm asleep when the sun is down.
But it turns out that if you look at health metrics, people
that are strictly nocturnal, do far worse on immune function or
metabolic function, et cetera, than people who are diurnal who
are awake during the daytime. And animals that are nocturnal,
it's the opposite. And animals that are so called corpuscular,
which tend to be active at dawn and at dusk. This is a beautiful
system. I won't go down that rabbit hole. But these are
animals whose visual systems operate best. They tend to be
predators like mountain lions. They have optimized their
waking times for the times when the animals they eat can't see
well in those light conditions. But given the rod cone ratios in
their eyes, that the mountain line is picking off. It's like,
when you see special forces, and they are looking through night
vision goggles, and they have a clear advantage, right? They're
seeing in the dark. That's basically what it's like to be
a mountain lion, as opposed to a bunny rabbit.
Would you say that a lot of these cycles evolved in the predator
prey relationships of the different throughout the food
chain? So it's basically all somehow has to do with survival in
this complicated web of predators and prey?
Almost certainly. There had to have been a time in which humans
being awake and active at night, as opposed to during the day,
led to higher levels of lethality, and probably particular in
kids. Can you imagine kids running around in the dark and
getting where there are a lot of animals that can see really
well under those conditions, and humans can't. And this would
be all pre electricity. Even if you're carrying a torch, I mean,
the range of illumination on a torch is nothing compared to
what a nighttime predator like a large cat or something can do.
They basically, they can see everything they need to in order
to eat us and not the other way around.
So one fascinating thing you said is that blew my mind and
we went right past it, which is that temperature is a really
powerful, like, if you were to think about the ways that
different parts of the body, different systems in the body
would communicate with each other, temperature would be a
really good one. And that just, I mean, maybe it's obvious, but
it kind of blew my mind just now that, yeah, these systems are
all distributed, right? And they have to kind of, they're not
actually sending signals, but they're coordinating, they need
some sort of universal thing to look at in order to coordinate.
And temperature is a nice one to, to, to build around. And that
way, you could control the behavior of all these different
systems by controlling the temperature, right? If it's
attractive to think of a mechanism where this master
circadian clocks, it creates a peptide or something that goes
and locks to receptors in all the cells and gets it just right.
But that leaves far too much room for variability, binding
affinities, cells in a lot of parts of our body are at
different stages of maturation, they're turning over liver
cells and so forth. And for instance, we have a clock in
our gut and in our liver, such that if we were just take out
your liver and put it on a table, and just look at the
expression of these genes, it would be in a 24 hour
oscillation on its own, it's independent. But something has
to entrain them and keep them all synchronized. And so it's not
obvious that it would be temperature. Takahashi's great
gift to biology was to show that all the stuff coming out of
this master circadian clock, at the end of the day, that's a
weird statement, no pun intended, at the end of the day and
the night, at the, at the end of the story, it all boils down to
making sure that the temperature of tissues
oscillates in the same fashion.
That's blowing my mind and thinking like what other
mechanism could possibly exist to create that kind of
oscillation.
Well, in your, your Russian, it's cold in Russia for a lot of
the year, the hibernation signal in certain animals is a
remarkable signal. There are peptides secreted from this
very same clock, that in animals like ground squirrels or
bears, they go into a kind of a torpor where everything
reproduction, metabolism, everything is reduced while
they're in their cave, they don't actually stay asleep all of
winter, that's a myth. And they actually do these very
dramatic and periodic arousals from hibernation where they
just shake and shake and shake, it looks like a seizure, and
then they go back under into the torpor. That's from a peptide
that's released. But that's different because that's about
shutting down the whole system. It's clear that having these
very regular oscillations every 24 hours is essential for
everything from metabolism to reproduction.
Is there an optimal temperature for sleep that I should
mention? I think your latest episode, you and people should
go check out helixsleep.com slash huberman to support Andrew.
Thanks for the plug.
I mean, the amazing thing about that stuff they created and
oh, and yes, you have a new podcast that's amazing. And
this past month, he did a whole series on sleep, which is
definitely check out. There's some podcasts that come out that
just make me want to be a better human being by just the
quality. Three blue one brown, Grant Sanderson is like that for
me, just like, wow, this is education is best. So Andrew
symbolizes that captures that brilliantly. So go support the
sponsor so he doesn't stop doing the thing. So they I think
they have a cooling pad too. So I ate sleep mattress sponsors
me. They've been they sent me a mattress and it's been I've
never listened. I used to sleep on the floor sleep or you fall
sleep or I fall I don't give a shit. It doesn't doesn't really
matter. But so like I would have never bought a nice mattress
because it's like why I'm fine. This is a floor is fine. But it
was a game changer to be able to control temperature. Like for
me, it's cooling to cool. I don't know what the hell it is.
Well, you want the brain and nervous system and rest of the
body needs to drop by about anywhere from two to three
degrees in order to get into your deepest sleep and
transition to sleep. That's really going to help. You don't
want to be cold that you're bothered and can't fall asleep.
But that's why some people like it really cold in the room and
under a warm blanket or with socks on for some people that can
that can be good because this temperature oscillation is such
that as your temperature is dropping, that correlates with
the generally with the most sleepy phase of your circadian
cycle. So cool is better for falling and staying asleep and
sleeping deeply. And then I guess like that's what AIDS
sleep showed there like an app is it warms back up to wake you
up. The idea that I haven't actually used it like this is
stupid. People say it works, but I just keep it the same
temperature throughout the night. But warming it up, I guess
wakes you up, which is which is fascinating. Yeah, because
you're the wake up signal is it's interesting to think about
it's not just correlated with an increase in body temperature.
The increase in body temperature is triggering the
release of cortisol from your adrenals and that's the wake
up signal. Do you think it's absolute temperatures we're
talking about is just even relative? Just even just the
decrease? Well, everyone's going to have slightly different
basal temperature. The idea that everybody should be 98.6. I
mean, that's a myth. And there's a theories that body
temperature overall has been dropping in the last 50 years
or so. I doubt that's true for somebody who is athletic like
you and is, you know, young and healthy. But basically the
the coldest period of that 24 hour cycle is when you are
going to be sleepiest. There's actually a period within that
24 hour cycle. It's a it's a time point called your
temperature minimum. And your temperature minimum tends to
be about two hours before your typical wake up time. I'm not
talking about the wake up time in the middle of the night
where you go use the bathroom or where you set an alarm to go
catch a flight. I mean, if you were to just allow yourself to
sleep without a clock for a few days, measure when you
typically wake up two hours before then is your temperature
minimum. And that temperature minimum turns out to be a
very important landmark in your circadian cycle because it
turns out that if you get bright light in your eyes in the
hours immediately before your temperature minimum. So two to
four hours or any time within the two or four hour window
before that temperature minimum, you are going to what's
called delay your circadian clock the next day that whole
oscillation is going to move forward. It'll make you want to
go to sleep later and wake up later. Whereas if you get
bright lighting your eyes in the hours after that temperature
minimum. So let's say for me, typical wake up time is six
a.m. my temperature minimum somewhere around four a.m. If
I get bright light in my eyes, five a.m. six a.m. seven a.m.
It's going to advance that oscillation so that I'll want to
go to bed earlier and wake up earlier the subsequent nights.
So you might say, wait, but most nights I go to sleep and
wake up at more or less the same time. Why is that? And
that's because the same thing is happening on both sides. You
are both advancing your clock a little bit and assuming that
you're looking at light in the evening, you're also delaying
your clock a little bit so you get kind of captured in
between and then your rhythm more or less oscillates at the
same period as we say is the spin of the earth. Unless
you're like you where you're I get text messages from you
sometimes that odd hours and I if you're on the east coast,
then I know that you had to have been pulling basically an
all night. Yeah. That's the interesting point about the
messiness of sleep. So most people seem to perform the
best when they have like a regular sleep schedule.
I perhaps am the same, but I don't know that and I tend to
believe that you can also perform relatively optimally
with chaos of sleep of like a weird soup of like power
naps and all nighters and all of that as long as you're
like happy doing what you love and maybe you can
tell me what you think about this. So I tend to for myself
try to minimize stress in life. So what I found for myself
with diet with sleep is that if I obsess about it being
perfect, then I'll actually stress quite a bit when it's
not like I'll feel shitty when I don't get enough sleep
because I know I should be getting more sleep as opposed to
the actual physiological effects of not getting enough sleep.
I find if I just accept whatever the hell happens happens
and smile and just take it all in like David Goggins style,
like if it sucks, it's even better or what is it?
Jocko's like good or whatever he says. Right. I think
there's several things that you said that are important,
but I agree that one can have a dysregulated sleep schedule
and still be a happy person and productive. Much of my
life I've pulled all nighters and slept weird schedules.
I think many people can probably relate to going to sleep,
waking up four hours later, being up for an hour or two on your
computer, then going back to sleep and getting amazing
sleep the next day functioning. I think it's important
that people have highlighted the importance of sleep
and getting enough rest. I do think it's gone too far
and now I'm editorializing a little bit, but I think that
we've created this anxiety about sleep that if we don't
sleep enough, we're going to get dementia. If we don't get
sleep, then the reproductive axis is going to completely crash.
There's a lot of evidence to the contrary and as well,
just based on personal experience and based on the fact that
sure, it may be that a solid eight hours with no interruptions
in there or nine or 10 could do great benefit, but you can do
really well if you do what you say, which is you wake up, you
don't want to start stressing about it, creating this meta
stress about sleep. Being happy is actually one of the most
powerful things that you can do, not allowing yourself to go
down that rabbit hole of stress. For the following reason,
a lot of our fatigue is not due just to the buildup of a
denocene or time of day, the circadian thing we were talking
about earlier. An additional factor is that effort is
related to the release of epinephrine, of adrenaline in
our brain and body. At some point, those levels get so high
that we get stressed mentally, we get stressed physically and
we want to give up. There are good data published in cell
showing that that signal, the epinephrine signal, is
eventually accumulates and there's a quit point. Dopamine,
the molecule of pursuit and reward and feeling good,
resets our ability to be in effort. In fact, a lot of people
don't know this, but dopamine is actually what epinephrine is
made from. If you look at the biochemical cascade, it starts
with tyrosine, which is rich in red, found in red meats and
things of that sort, and tyrosine is eventually
converted through things like Ldopa into dopamine. Dopamine is
made into epinephrine. I mean, this sounds kind of new agey,
but happiness, joy, and pleasure in what you're doing
creates a chemical milieu that provides more of the chemicals
that allow for effort. There's nothing new agey about that.
It's in every biochemistry textbook. It's in every decent
neuroscience textbook. They just don't talk about the
happiness part. They just talk about the dopamine part. I
think that limiting your stress and at least recognizing,
okay, if you're pulling an all nighter or you're somehow
on messed up sleep, that there is going to be a point in that
24 hour cycle where your brain is not trustworthy, where your
mental state is not worth placing too much weight on
because you are near that temperature minimum and near
that temperature minimum, which correlates to that two
hours, about two hours before you would normally wake up,
the brain is hobbling along and anything you feel or think at
that time should not be given too much value. But if you can
trick yourself into thinking that's the pleasure point, you
afford yourself a huge advantage. There's a study done by a
colleague of mine at Stanford that showed that positive
anticipation about the next day events actually is a powerful
metric for creating quality sleep even if the sleep is very
reduced. You'll love this one and a lot of people might be
critical of this, so I just want to make sure that this is
work done out of Harvard Medical. It was Bob Stickgold's
lab and Emily Hoglund did the study that showed looking at
Ochem, performance on Ochem scores. Okay, so organic chemistry
Harvard's pretty tough subject, highly motivated, a number of
very good control groups in this study. What she showed was
that consistency of total sleep duration was far more
important for performance on these exams than total sleep
duration itself. So it's not that just getting more sleep
allows you to perform better. Consistently getting about the
same amount of sleep is better for performance at least on
Ochem than just getting more. That's interesting. So that's
referring to more that there should be a consistent habit
versus the total amount. To me, the entirety of the picture of
sleep is similar to nutrition in that it feels like it's
there's so many variables involved and it's so person
specific. So, you know, a lot of studies, I mean, this is the
way of science, has to look and aggregate the effects on
sleep. It doesn't focus on high performers, which are
individuals ultimately. Like the question isn't, so it's a
very important question is like, what kind of diet fights
obesity, reduces obesity? It's another question, what kind of
diet allows David Goggins to be the best version of himself?
So these high performers in different avenues and the same
thing with sleep, like people that tell me that I should get
eight hours of sleep, it's like, it's, I mean, I get it and
they may be right, but they may be very wrong. There's no
evidence that eight is better than six, that you could very
well do better on six than on eight. There are a few other
things that turn out to be strong parameters for success in
this domain. For instance, your entire life, waking or
asleep, is broken up into these 90 minute ultradian cycles.
If you look at ability to attend or do math problems or do
anything, you know, drive, performance tends to ramp up
slowly within a 90 minute cycle peak and then come down at
the end of that 90 minute cycle. And in sleep, we go
through these stage one, two, three, four, REM, etc. We
talked more about that, if you like, those on 90 minute
ultradian cycles as well. Ending your sleep after a 90
minute cycle at the near the end of a 90 minute cycle, say at
the end of six hours, in many cases is better for you than
sleeping an additional hour, seven hours and waking up in
the middle of an ultradian cycle. And there are a few
apps that can measure this based on body movements and
things like that that have you, your alarm go off at the end
of an ultradian cycle. And if you wake up in the middle of
an ultradian cycle, sometimes not always, you can be very
groggy for a long period of time. I certainly do better on
six hours than I do on seven. I happen to like an eight hour
sleep. It feels great, but I haven't slept an entire eight
hours without waking up in the middle of the night at some
point in, I don't know, forever. I can't remember. It's
probably some point in infancy, but and I function well
during the day. I think that that's a big, that's an
important parameter is how do you feel during the day? Almost
everybody experiences some sort of dip in energy in the late
afternoon or what would correlate to their temperature
peak. And that's a good time of day to get either a 90
minute or less nap. Or if you're not a napper or you can't
nap, feet elevated has been shown to be good for clear
out of some of this. The glimphatic system is this
kind of like sewer system of the brain that you can clear
stuff out. So legs elevated or one thing that I'm a big
proponent of and that my lab has been studying is what I
now call NSDR, non sleep deep rest. And this is just lying
down. There are some scripts that we're going to put out
there soon as a free resource. There's some hypnosis
scripts that my colleague David Spiegel has put out there as
a free resource. But non sleep deep rest is allowing your
system to drop into states of real calm that allow you to
get better at falling asleep later. And they can be very
restorative for cognitive and motor function. There's at
least one study out of Denmark that shows that the basal
ganglia, which is an area of the brain that's involved in
motor planning and action, one of these 20 minute non sleep
deep rest protocols resets levels of neuromodulators like
dopamine in the basal ganglia to the same levels that they
were right after a long night's sleep. So I also
respectfully or semi respectfully disagree with the
idea that you can't recover lost sleep. What does that mean?
I mean that there's no IRS for sleep. So what does it mean
to be in debt for sleep? If you're falling asleep during
the day and you're sleepy, like you're falling asleep,
that's a good sign of insomnia means you're not sleeping
enough at night. If you're fatigued during the day,
but you're not falling asleep, so you're just exhausted,
but you're not finding yourself falling asleep in
meetings and in conversation, then chances are you're
fatiguing your system through something else like a long
run in the middle of the night at Boston or whatever it is
that you're up to lately at 3 a.m. Yes. There is a magic to
the nap and maybe you could speak to the because you
mentioned these protocols that don't necessarily, so
they're non sleep, but to me the nap one or two a day can
almost irrespective of how much sleep I get the night
before have a fundamental change in my mood and my
performance for the better for the better for the better.
Yeah, likewise. So I do tend to kind of experiment with
durations. It's it's consistently surprising to me
how like a nap of like 10 minutes, I don't know, maybe you
can speak to the perfect duration of a nap, but I find
that it's like magic that a short nap does as much good
and often better than a longer one for me, for me
subjective. What would be a longer one? Longer than 90
minutes? No, no, like 90 minutes or but longer than
90, like two hours. Yeah, that's dropping you starting to
drop you into REM sleep and even if it's a tiny amount of
REM sleep, people can come out of those naps kind of
disoriented. Right. I mean, remember in sleep space and
time are are totally uncoupled and so they that's an odd
state to reenter the world in if you're not going to stay
there for a while like for a good night's sleep. I think a
20 minute nap is pretty fantastic. Would you say
that's the if you were to recommend to the general and
it's it's very weird to recommend anything to the
general populace because obviously it's very person
specific, but what's a good one where you say to friends
is 20 minutes, 20 or 30 minutes, 20 or 30 minutes
because you're going unless you're sleep deprived,
you're going to stay out of REM sleep, rapid eye movement
sleep. If you're sleep deprived, you'll drop right
into it. If you've ever traveled and you're really
jet lagged, you go to the hotel, you lay down for
one second, all of a sudden you're just like you're
you're in a psychedelic dream, which can be pretty
great too. But I think that 20, 30 minutes and if you
can't sleep, some people have trouble napping, then
learning to relax the body as much as possible like
trying to remove all expression from your face
completely letting your body kind of float. If people
have a hard time relaxing when they're awake, there's
some terrific clinically and research tested hypnosis
protocols that we could provide links to that are
cost free and that teach you how to just completely
release the alertness button and you just start
drifting. Now, the problem is if you don't have an
alarm or something to go off, the other day I did
one and I'm almost embarrassed to say this, but
there's a component of it where you actually are
supposed to let your hand float up because it's a
hypnosis script. So they, it's my colleague, David
Spiegel in the script. He says, let your hand float
up. I woke up an hour later and my hand was still
floating. Wow. Yeah. And I was and I was completely
relaxed. So hypnosis is just a matter of going
deep relaxation, narrowing of context. And it's all
self imposed. A lot of people think that hypnosis is
like the stage thing with the pendant and the
chicken, you know, people fucking like chickens.
But real hypnosis is self hypnosis. You're learning
to, it involves some shifts in the way that you,
the hypnotic induction involves looking up, closing
your eyes, slowly deep breath and then imagine
yourself floating and people vary on a scale of
about one to four for being the most easily
hypnotized. There are a few people who it's very
hard for them to allow themselves to go into
these states. But for most people, they just,
they're gone. And it's nice if you can have access
to those states because when you come out of it,
you feel amazing. You feel like you slept the whole
night. At least most people report that. So
refresh alert. Ready to go. I mean, basically,
you're ready. Yeah, I know you have this
interesting challenge coming up and I'm curious
what you're going to do to reset in the hours.
The frequency of running is every four hours. It's
not going to allow you to get any more than
a couple hours sleep in between. A couple hours. So
we should tell to people, I'd be curious to get
your thoughts and advice on it. I'm on March 5th
running 48 miles with Mr. David Goggins. So four
miles every four hours and people should join us.
He's that mad man that's going to be live on
Instagram starting at 8 p.m. Pacific on March 5th.
So you're going to join him in person?
In person. Undisclosed location. Undisclosed location.
And I was trying to clarify, like, okay, so we're
going to, like, there'll be like friendly people
around or something. No, it's just me and him.
Friendly people. I don't know. Like, I just feel
it's very difficult to be with David alone in a room.
I imagine his, I mean, I've done some work with David.
His energy is infectious. That's an intense schedule.
And the periodicity of those four hours, every four
hours, four miles, means that there's no chance
of catching an extended block of sleep.
So it's about three hours that you have
non exercising every time. And of course, it takes
time to try to fall asleep and there's an intensity
to the whole thing. I mean, it's probably impossible
to get anything more than two hours of sleep
if you wanted to. So the optimal thing is probably
from the sound of it. I'd be curious to see what
you think. But like, it's getting a few 90 minute naps.
Yeah. Well, I thought about this a bit before we
met up today. So I think there are two general approaches
that could work. Neither one necessarily better than the other.
One would be just to hammer through the whole thing,
just to get your level of alertness and adrenaline
ramped up so that you don't expect yourself to sleep.
There are certain advantages there. One is a subjective
kind of emotional advantage, which is if you can't sleep,
you're not going to be stressed about that.
Yes. And if you do fall asleep, it's a bonus.
Yeah. Provided you wake up and you don't look up
and you realize David's been out running for half an hour
and you're behind, right? Chances are that's not the way
that's not the way it'll go. You're set an alarm.
So that's one approach. And I grabbed that from a couple of
friends who were in the SEAL teams and they'll say that
during Bud's, there's this infamous Hell Week and there's
this five day, excuse me, definitely five days of no
sleep, although there is a component where they offer a nap
at one particular point. And a lot of people will say that
it's worse to go down for that nap and then be woken up 20
minutes later than to just stay up. So that's one option.
Let's call it the full blitz hammer through option.
And if you happen to fall asleep, you do.
Bonus, yeah. It's a bonus. The other one would be to
really anchor in these ultradian cycles. So coming back
from a run, unless you're thoroughly exhausted, you're
probably going to have a few minutes where you're going
to want to stay awake. It's going to be hard to just
immediately fall asleep and getting as much sleep as you
can in the intervening periods provided that you guys
aren't posting constantly or doing something else.
There's a question of whether or not you want to nourish,
whether or not you want to eat or not in that time.
Anytime we put food in our gut, I don't care if it's meat
or oatmeal or broccoli or cardboard, you're drawing blood
into the gut and so you are going to divert some energy
towards digestion and it's going to make you sleep.
There's a reason why the rest and digest, the parasympathetic
nervous system is called that. So you could decide that you
were only going to sleep in certain blocks, in between
certain blocks. That would be another way to think about
this. Because I did this last year. I ran very slow. Some of
it was walking. I was listening to audiobooks and one of the
biggest mistakes I did is to overeat during that time.
It was, I made the experience very unpleasant. So I have
been considering basically eating almost nothing throughout
the day. Being fasted will increase alertness because
high levels of epinephrine in your system from fasting.
You just think about fasting or being thirsty before you
get exhausted. People always think, if I don't eat, I'm
going to be tired. No, the energy that you derive from food
is going to be used from glycogen and after a long
storage and conversion process. So the food that you eat is
going to consume energy to digest and so a lot of people
feel better fasted and presumably throughout history
people have fasted for long periods of time and had to
stay up for two or three days and God forbid if a family
member is sick, you can stay awake in the hospital without
any trouble. So that alertness system, it's all mental.
Actually, and then there's a third, so you could try and
sleep or take care in between. Yes. Yeah. And then there's a
third approach. Uh oh. Yeah. But I didn't come up with it.
What is it? What David did. So I actually texted him
earlier because I had a feeling that I heard that you
were going to do this challenge. So I asked David.
So these are David Goggins words, not mine. Okay.
One, being organized is super important. Two, you want to
waste as little time as possible. Three, you need to eat,
sleep, and rehab in as little time as possible so you can
sleep as much as possible. Interesting. By the way, this is
the first time I'm reading this. Four, meal prep and
gear prep, etc, are very important. That's consistent
with everything I know about military. They don't leave
too much to chance. Five, again, these are David's words.
All that said, he's fucked on most of that because he'll be
interviewing me before or after. I will also be
interviewing him. Oh, shit. Five, long story short, the
only thing that might help is a very special pill. Oh, this is
interesting. They're called SIU pills. Hard to get, but I
believe he can get them. SIU stands for suck it up. Tell him
to grab his balls. He'll find those pills there. That's
number six. All right. And then the last one, stay hard,
brother. Stay hard, brother. Amen. I, you know, that was one
of the other things that I think makes this challenging is
that it'll be doing a podcast throughout. So, first of all,
I'll do a long one before and after, but also I'll have to
come up with things to talk to him about. So, like, it's a
different thing to do something privately and then
publicly. I know it doesn't seem that way, but like one of
the hardest, the hardest thing I had to do last time was to
turn on the camera and talk to the camera because I, last
time I did it, I recorded every single time I did a leg, I
recorded something I'm grateful for. It's just kind of
unrelated. I'm not a fan of like talking about like how I'm
feeling or how the run is going. I want to do something
totally unrelated to the run and with the run as the
background, you know, sort of something I'm grateful for,
just any kind of interesting discussion. Gratitude. I mean,
I hate the word hack. Like, oh, it's a dopamine hack or it's a
serotonin. I don't like the word hack because A, it's
disrespectful to hackers who do a real thing and B, a hack,
it implies that it's some sort of trick that you're kind of
gaming the system. You know, what works is mechanism, right?
Biological mechanisms were designed to work and they were
selected for to work under variable conditions. And as you
know, and I know, and we have great appreciation for the fact
that the nervous system was designed to be an adaptive
machine so that you don't have to sleep eight hours every
night. Yeah. You can do this thing. And things like
gratitude allow you to tap into chemical resources and that's
not a hack. The fact that being grateful for something
external to the event happens to release serotonin and have a
certain soothing effect or a dopamine and give you more
epinephrine and let you go further. That's not a hack.
That's actually what allowed the human machine to evolve to
the point that it is now. Every time, you know, an inventor
eventually created something that worked and felt great about
it. You can imagine that the first, you know, air flight felt
pretty awesome and motivated those people to go on and do
more that they didn't just go on, you know, yawn and go have
a beer. So, being able to access the genuine internal
states of gratitude and reward works. You can't trick the
system. You can't pretend that you're grateful for something,
but if you can identify or attach yourself to some larger
goal or something that's deeply gratifying to you or place it
in service to a relative that passed away that you care a
lot about, that's not a hack. That's accessing the deepest
components of your nervous system and to steal your kind of
lingo. Yeah, there's real beauty there, right? Yeah, but for an
introvert like myself and I think David, I don't know if he's
an introvert, but like he's not, despite the fact that he has
written a great book and he communicates, he puts himself
out there, he's not really a fan of communication. He's not,
I don't know if he's energized by speaking his mind.
I don't know enough to know. I mean, we've done a little bit of
work together and we're in communication now and again. He's
obviously super impressive. I don't know. It seems like he's a
pretty private guy, so I don't have access to that.
For me, I'll just speak to myself and I think David is the
same, but I'll speak to myself that it was a hugely draining
thing not to experience the gratitude, experiencing the
gratitude just like you're saying is really energizing. It's
a powerful thing. It's a, it's a, it can lift up your mood, but
to turn on the camera and have to use words, which is very
difficult to do, to explain like what you're feeling and do it
in the way that you know a bunch of people will be watching,
is really draining. And one of the things I'm concerned about
that in this whole process, how do I keep my mind sharp
while also keeping the performance, the physical
performance sharp? And that's a little bit scary because
talking to David like actual intellectually sharp, like
thinking, being charismatic and as much as I can be,
and like being so maintaining a sense of humor too,
because I can be, I become with sleep deprivation, with exhaustion.
You start being the Russian bear comes out. You start being
such a, like you, I've become a David Goggins essentially,
like, Oh, it makes you irritable. Sleep deprivation makes us
irritable. Yeah. It's clear so that in the early part of the
night, we get a higher percentage of those old
tradian cycles are occupied by slow wave sleep, sometimes
just called non REM sleep. And those early night sleep bouts
are great for muscular repair and for certain forms of
learning, but REM sleep, the rapid eye movement sleep,
which it starts to accumulate and occupy more of those 90
minute trade in cycles toward the late part of a sleep bout.
So toward typically toward morning, but toward after you've
been asleep a while. That's when you do the emotional
processing. That's when we recover the ability to feel
refreshed and not irritated by things. And if you deprive
people of REM sleep, they become selectively bad at
uncoupling the emotion from things that happened in the previous
days. So the little things start to seem like big
things. I always know I'm REM sleep deprived when I'm
irritable. And when I look at like the word the and it
doesn't look like it's spelled right. And I'm kind of pissed
off about it. Like something's off. And we actually are
becoming slightly psychotic when we're REM sleep deprived.
You're not going to get a lot of REM sleep in this thing,
except as you fatigue more, if you do fall asleep, you're
going to drop more and more into REM so that those 90 minute
cycles, you won't have to go through stage one, stage two,
stage three, and then REM. You're just going to drop
right into REM. So you can count on your system to
compensate for you. But I think that just the knowledge
that you tend to get irritable as the time goes on, just
that third personing of yourself and that awareness,
the observer, that can be very beneficial because
there may be bouts during this event when you just should
probably say nothing. And maybe you just smile and record
or not smile or do whatever it is because you're going to
be conserving energy. If it feels like a grind, that's
epinephrine being released. That's epinephrine that you
could devote to the physical effort. But humor is an
amazing anecdote for this because it resets that it's
that dopamine release that gives us that fresh
perspective. And it's a real chemical thing. It's not a
hack. It's not a trick. It's not a visualization. It's
biology in action. Well, but I think the act of
interviewing, of conversation in these processes, even if
you don't want to do it, the right thing to do, even
when you're feeling irritable, is just to do the third
person view and be able to express with words that
you're feeling irritable. Like express what you're going
through. You know, use words which I hate doing. I
honestly, I think my ultimate thing would be just to
never say a single word to David Gagas and just go
through hell. It doesn't matter what we do, but to do
it quietly, to also express it. That's my ultimate hell.
And I think that's definitely going to be, if I know
David at all, he's going to try and find your buttons.
Like he's going to, I mean, he, even though he knows he
can complete this and I believe that he trusts that
you can complete it too. I believe you can, you will
complete it. You know you will complete it. Right.
There's no question about that, but he's not going to
make it easier for you. He's going to make it harder.
Well, I'm afraid. So I'm like, you know, it's very
difficult for me. So 48 miles is not easy. I have not
been training that much. I'm now ramping up, but it's
not like going to kill me. We'll see what happens.
Of course, for him, he might always get bored because I
think the 48 miles for him is easy. I think I don't
know that. I don't know that ever gets easy. I have a
friend, Casey Courgel, who works with David. He does some
physical rehab type stuff with him and he took Casey on a
50 mile and Casey said, it's like 16 miles into it. He was
just like, he hit his wall, but he found it. They find it
to get, you know, you find that portal. There is one
thing I want to mention. There's some very good
physiology that can perhaps support the actual running
effort part. These are very new data. We have a study
going on with David Spiegel at Stanford looking at how
different patterns of breathing can affect heart rate
variability. Heart rate variability is good. There's
this interesting mechanism that I think most people
might not realize, but that medical students learned
that your breathing and your heart rate and your brain
are in this really remarkable interplay. It goes like
this. When you inhale, this isn't breath work. We're
not going to do breath work, but when you inhale, the
diaphragm moves down. The heart gets a little bigger
because there's a little more space in the thoracic cavity.
As a consequence, blood flows a little bit more slowly
through that larger volume. There's a category of
neurons, the synomatrial node, that sees that, that
recognizes that slower rate through that larger
volume, sends a signal to the brainstem, and the
brainstem sends a signal back to the heart to speed
the heart up. Every time you inhale, you're in
speeding the heart up. When you exhale, the diaphragm
moves up, the heart gets a little smaller, the volume
is smaller, blood flows more quickly through the
heart, signal sent up to the brain, and the brain
sends a signal back to slow the heart down. This is
the basis of heart rate variability. At any point,
if you feel like your heart is racing and you feel
like you're working too hard per unit of effort,
focus on making your exhales longer or more
intense than your inhales. If ever you feel like
you're truly flagging, you do not have the energy
to get up. It's like, okay, it's time to go and
you're exhausted. You want to draw more oxygen into
the system, get your heart rate going faster. Now,
some people want to hear this, probably thinking,
well, this is really obvious, but there's so much
out there about breath work and how to breathe and
all this stuff, but no one talks about how to do it
in real time while you're exerting effort.
So this is something like almost like second by
second, you can adjust things just in real time
based on how you're feeling, but based on the
heart rate, the experience of the heart rate.
That's right. So one thing that could be very
efficient and we're doing some work with
athletes now, these are unpublished data, but
if you, while you're running, if you want to get
into a nice cadence of heart rate variability,
do double inhales while you're running. What
this will do is that when you do the double
inhale has the effect of reopening the
avioli of the lungs. Your lungs are filled with
tons of little sacs when you, they tend to
collapse as you fatigue and carbon dioxide
builds up in the bloodstream and that's when
we start getting stress. If you've ever been
sprinting and you start getting beat and
you're going as hard as you can, what you
really need to do is double inhale and
reinflight these sacs and the lungs and
then offload a lot of carbon dioxide.
So when you're at a steady cadence and
you're feeling good, double inhale, exhale.
Double inhale, exhale is a terrific way to
breathe while you're in ongoing effort.
By the way, any recommendations or
differences in nose or mouth breathing?
So nasal breathing, there's a lot of
excitement now obviously about nasal
breathing because of James Nestor's book,
Breath. There was also, if people are
going to know about that book, that I do
feel like out of respect for my
colleagues. There was a book by Sandra
Kahn and Paul Erlich at Stanford, both
professors at Stanford, with a forward
by Jared Diamond and Robert Sapolsky.
So some heavy hitters in this book and
the book is called Jaws, A Hidden Epidemic.
And it's all about how nasal breathing is
better for us, especially kids, than
being mouth breathers. Under most
conditions, for sake of improving
immunity, it turns out there's a
microbiome in the nose, like all sorts
of good stuff about nasal breathing
preferentially. But when we exercise,
you can do pure nasal breathing, but the
problem is once you get up to kind of
third and fourth and fifth gear effort,
you can't nasal breathe and be at
maximum capacity unless you've been
training it for a very long time. So I
would say double inhale through the
nose, offload through the mouth. So
double inhale, exhale while you're in
steady effort. And then if you really
feel like you need to gas it and you're
pushing, the data show that then just
use whatever's there, right? Just go
into kind of default mode because
bringing too much concentration to
something is also going to spend up an
efferent. The goal is to get into that,
I don't like the word, but the flow
state where you're not thinking too
much, you're just in exertion. So these
are things that can help in the
transitions, but I don't think there's
any secret breathing technique. You
know, anyone who's been in the SEAL teams
will kind of, you know, they'll tell you
like, there's no breathing technique,
right? There's tools that you can
look to from time to time and these
double inhale, exhales can be great for
setting heart rate ability in very
quickly and getting into a steady cadence
while you're exercising. But if there's a
sprint, like if suddenly you guys are
sprinting, ditch the double inhale,
exhale and just sprint. One thing you
mentioned, he's probably going to push
my buttons. It's a good place to ask a
question about anger. So I'll probably
get pissed off at him at some point,
I'm guessing. And do you have
thoughts from a scientific perspective
or also just the personal philosophical
perspective about the role of anger and
all of this in managing alertness,
performance? I think about this a lot
because there's so much out there about
how important it is to do things from a
place of love, you know. I tweet about
it all the time. And I think love is
powerful, right? You know, it is
interesting that autonomic arousal
alertness, let's just make use simple
language, alertness physiologically
looks identical for love and
excitement as it does for anger and
frustration and wanting to defeat your
opponent or whoever that opponent
happens to be. They're identical except
that the love component does tend to be
associated with the release of neuro
chemicals of the serotonin and
dopamine type that do have this
replenishment component. I don't think
one wants to be in constant anger and
friction, but I mean, I'll come clean a
bit. There have been portions of my
career where some of my best work, my
extra two hours, my ability to nail a
really hard deadline or problem has come
from not wanting to get out competed or
for wanting to prove something.
These days, I'm not oriented from
that place toward my work quite as
often, but I think we should be really
honest. Anger is powerful. It provided
it's channeled. It's very, very powerful
and it can give you a ton of fuel and
gas to push when otherwise you tap.
Yeah, Joe Rogan has, aside from being a
fan of his, has been an inspiration to
sort of be, to have a kind of loving
view on the world in the way you
approach the world, to me, so I've
tended to want to approach the world
that way, but in the same way David
Goggins has been an inspiration to like
yeah, be angry at stuff and use it as
fuel. Like he almost conjures up
artificial demons in his mind just so
he can fight them. You know, but at the
same time I tried that because I did a
challenge in the summer of a world for
30 days. I was doing a lot of pushups
and it was over time. It was counter
productive for me. I found that it was
easier to just, like the roller coaster
that the emotional, like being angry at
stuff takes you can also be exhausting.
Oh, absolutely. And it can take you down,
like the the ups of it are good, but the
downs are bad. And what I found is
better to get, to use it as a boost
every once in a while, but mostly to get
lost in the, you're talking about the
breath work, the, like getting lost in
the ritual of it, like the, the beat,
like that, as opposed to going on the
big roller coasters of emotion.
Yeah, this brings us into the realm of
neuroendocrinology. There's a
fascinating relationship between the
hormone system and the nervous system.
And, you know, hormones work in general on
slower time scales. The definition of
hormone is something, is a chemical
released at one location in the body,
goes in and acts at multiple locations
far away and within the body. Pheromone
would be between two bodies. Neuro
chemicals like dopamine and serotonin
tend to work a little more quickly. There
are hormones like adrenaline and
cortisol that can work very fast, but
here I'm referring mainly to
testosterone, prolactin. Prolactin tends
to be in men and women tends to make
people kind of lazy and want to take
care of young. It tends to throw down
body fat so we can stay up late. It's
secreted in response to having children.
These are all in humans and in animals.
There's a very interesting relationship
between testosterone and dopamine
that speaks directly to what we're
talking about now. So dopamine and
testosterone are closely related in the
pituitary system and obviously
testosterone comes from the adrenals and
from the testes. But the major
effect of testosterone is to make
effort feel good. That's what
testosterone does. It has other effects
too, right? Reproductive effects,
androgenizing parts of the body, etc.
But it makes effort feel good. The
testosterone molecule is synthesized
from cholesterol. Cholesterol can
either be made into cortisol, a stress
hormone, or testosterone, but not both.
So you have a limited amount of
cholesterol and it gets
diverted towards stress or this
pathway where effort feels good.
That's the pathway you want to get into.
The anger pathway, if we were to just
kind of play a mind experiment here,
the anger eventually is going to divert
more of that cholesterol molecule to
cortisol and stress and you will be
slowly depleting testosterone. Now going
into this, you'll have plenty of
testosterone. But after a couple days,
there have been very interesting studies
showing that testosterone doesn't
necessarily drop with sleep
deprivation. That's a bit of a myth.
You need it to replenish testosterone.
You need sleep to replenish testosterone
eventually. But the real question is,
are you enjoying what you're doing?
And here, some of the major work on
this was done by Duncan French, who
runs the UFC Training Center. He did his
PhD at Yukon Stores, did a really
beautiful PhD thesis looking at the
relationship between stress hormones
testosterone and dopamine. Really
interesting work. And the takeaway
from all of this is if you can just
convince yourself or ideally if you can
just enjoy yourself, you're going to
maintain or maybe even increase
testosterone stores, which will make
effort feel good. And to me, aside from
neuroplasticity where everything becomes
automatic after this experience, to me
that's the holy grail. When effort feels
good, life just gets way better. And
we're not talking about achieving the
reward. I'm not talking about the end of
this thing. I'm talking about the process
of it feeling really good.
Yeah, there is a magic to, I don't know
if you can comment on this, but I find
myself being able to, if I just say I'm
feeling good, like this old hack of
like smiling while you're running. If I
just tell myself, I'm feeling really
good right now. No matter how I'm
actually feeling, I'll start feeling way
better. And the whole thing, there's a
cascading effect that allows me to
maximize the effort. It's quite
fascinating. It's weird.
Hormones are powerful. The relationship
between thoughts and hormones and these
physiological things is enormous. I had a
colleague that a few years ago, he was
dying of pancreatic cancer. And I was
interviewing him just because he's an
important figure in our community and I
was a friend. And there was one day where
he told me, he said, you know, I don't
want to make it past the new year. I
just, and it was crushing for me to
hear. And I knew that he had been on
some androgen therapy for a whole
set of other things. And I said, you
know, have you taken your androgen
cream? And he was like, no, I haven't
done it. Go get it for me. I have this
on film. He takes it, he puts the
androgen cream on. I'm not suggesting
people take androgens, by the way. 10
minutes later, he says, you know what? I
think I want to live into the new year.
And I'm going to write 12 letters of
recommendation. He went to MIT, by the
way. He said, I'm going to write 12
letters of recommendation. And he did.
And so there's something about these
molecules that in an ancient way, in
all organisms, all mammals as far as we
know, are linked to the will to live.
They're linked to effort and making
effort feel good, which has been
fundamental to the evolution of our
species. I always say, people think that
the opposite of testosterone is estrogen,
but it's not. The opposite of
testosterone is prolactin, which makes us
feel quiescent and not in pursuit of
things, et cetera. Testosterone makes
effort feel good. Estrogen makes
emotions feel okay.
And they are in mixed amounts in
people, as I say, of all chromosomal
backgrounds. Yeah. I mean, you also
mentioned fasting potentially through
this two day thing. It'd be cool to get
your thoughts about fasting in general.
Do you think on a personal level and at
a higher sort of level of studies that
you're aware of and physiology and so on,
what do you think about intermittent
fasting of like not eating for 16 hours
and then having an eight hour window or
something I've been doing a lot recently,
which is eating only once a day. So
that's 24 hour fast, I guess, one meal a
day or something I've been thinking
about doing, haven't done yet, of doing
like 72 hours, and some people do like
five day fasts in general. So this will
be, for this particular run, will be a
48 hour fast if I don't eat at all. What
do you think about that for performance,
for mood, for all those kinds of things?
I can speak a little bit to the science
and a little bit of my own experience
and then some anecdotes of people that
have done very hard, very long duration
things and what they've told me. So I
just want to make sure I'm separating
those out so people know my sourcing.
I think now none of this is about the
actual long term nutritional benefits
of one thing or the other. But if you
look at the science on intermittent
fasting, it's pretty remarkable. Before
I was at Stanford, my lab was in San
Diego, one of my colleagues was such in
Panda at the Salk is phenomenal
biologist and researcher, wrote a book
called The Circadian Code. It's very,
very good and kind of popularized
intermittent fasting, although there
were others that had talked about this
before. Ori Hofmeckler talked about the
warrior diet. People probably might not
know who Ori is, but he's sort of the
originator of this business of
intermittent fasting. He didn't want to
day or limited. Anyway, Sachin has
published papers, peer reviewed papers
in very good journals like Cell and
elsewhere showing that limiting the
consumption of calories to eight, four,
six or eight or even 10 hours of every
24 hour cycle and keeping that more or
less correlated with the light when
the sun is out leads to less liver
disease, improved metabolic markers, less
body fat, etc. In the mouse studies, they
even gave the mice the choice to eat
whatever they wanted as much as they
wanted as long as they restricted it to
a certain period within the 24 hour
cycle. They did great. They
maintained a healthy weight or even
lost weight when they took the same
amount of food and they stretched it out
across the 24, the entire 24 hour cycle.
So this is eating every hour or two
hours. The animals got fat and sick.
So it's pretty remarkable data. How much
of that translates to humans isn't
clear, but one thing that's really
clear with humans is adherence. We
could talk a lot about nutrition and
some of the problems with the studies
on nutrition is that what people will
do in a laboratory is often hard to do
in the real world. Low carbohydrate
diets, because they tend to
focus on foods that have high amino
acid content like meats, generally
people are less hungry on those than
they are on calorie matched diets of
fruits and vegetables and carbohydrates
because when the insulin goes up, you
get hungry and you want to eat more. So
this is not a push for carnivore or a
push against one thing or the other.
It's just there are a lot of factors.
But we know for sure that when you're
fasted or when you have low amounts of
carbohydrate in your system, complex
carbohydrate, your alertness is going to
go up. Fast increases
increases alertness and epinephrine
for the sole purpose of getting you to
go out and find food. Can you imagine if
our ancestors got hungry and they were
like, oh I'm too tired to go find food?
We wouldn't be here. You'd be like robots
or something like one of your
alien buddies will be like running
the planet. So I think that if you want
to be alert, fasting or keeping
complex carbohydrates to a minimum is
very valuable. If you want to sleep and
you want to be sleepy, ingesting foods
that have a lot of tryptophan, which is
the precursor to serotonin, so complex
carbohydrates like rice and grains,
turkey, white meats, those things do
create a sense of sleepiness. However,
there is a caveat and this is one
problem with the once a meal, once a day
meal, is that anytime you have a lot of
food in the gut, you're increasing
sleepiness because you're diverting
blood to the gut. It's going to trigger
the vagus to signal to the brain to
shut down your system and utilize those
nutrients, digest and utilize those
nutrients. So I've done the once a day
eating thing. The problem is I eat so
much in that meal that I'm exhausted
and so it doesn't always lend itself
well to the schedule.
But so in a six or eight hour eating
block for me is a little bit better.
I do eat carbohydrates. I'm probably one of the few
people left on the west coast that
actually consumes carbohydrates and
will say that out loud. I don't know
people eat carbs anymore. That's weird.
They don't. Or do you even find carbs these days?
I like oatmeal. I like rice. The other
time is if people are doing very high
intensity weight training, they need to
replenish glycogen. On the alertness
side, I do feel like it's probably
person independent. For me, alertness,
being alert makes my life better in a
lot of ways more than just the
alertness itself.
Like for example, one of the things that
discovered with fasting is that when I
was training twice a day in Jiu Jitsu,
for example, I'm competing and so on, I
performed way better at things that you
traditionally would say you need carbs
for, which is explosive movements and all
that.
I don't know if I actually perform better
in terms of like the force of the
explosion, the explosiveness. What I do
know is the alertness resulted in me
doing the technique more precisely.
That's the dopamine and epinephrine
system in action. There are some
other just purely physical aspects to
one diet versus the other that can be
complicated. If you're ingesting
carbohydrates, complex carbohydrates,
you're going to replenish glycogen,
which is great, but they also tend to be
bulky and fibrous. I've never rolled
Jiu Jitsu, but running when you have a
lot of bulky, fibrous food in your
gut or in your intestine, it can be a
barrier. It can be uncomfortable. Some
people do really well on low carbohydrate,
meat rich diets because they're just not
as bloated. They're not carrying as much
water and other stuff. Carbohydrate
carries a lot of water molecules with it.
There are aspects to being able to
train and being really explosive because
you feel light. One anecdote that
really, again, I'm not encouraging any
one particular kind of diet, but I have a
friend who was in the SEAL teams,
happened to know a number of people in
that community. He told me that he did
this very long fast. It was a fast that
I think you get to eat a little bit of
soup or broth and there's like a bar
or something, but it's like a nine day
thing. He's a very strong athlete.
He said that on day six or seven, he was
running up some hills or something while
he was on deployment. He felt
amazing. He had kind of hit this other
level. He was somebody who had boxed in
the Naval Academy. He was somebody who
knows and knew high output and he felt
like he discovered the 13th floor,
that there was another floor to this
performance space that he hadn't
experienced except while he had fasted.
He said that that was a remarkable
clarity of mind, energy. It's a little bit
of what you described. He described a
kind of suppleness and explosiveness.
So there's probably something there on which day.
Once he was in the fifth or sixth day of the
fast. See, this is the thing. I've never
been there on the second, third, fourth,
fifth day, that kind of thing, but when I
just don't eat for 20 hours, many times
through my training, the clarity, it's like
you feel like everyone is moving super
slowly and you're able to like dominate
people you weren't able to before. It's
like you might have slipped into or
switched over rather into full ketosis
and ketogenic diets done properly can be
great for people. The problem is if you do
it wrong, you can really mess it up. I
tried it once and I basically got
psoriasis. I thought my scalp was gonna
fall off. I was like sloughing off all
this and then I stopped and I was
taking the liquid ketones and then
all of a sudden I felt better again.
But I was told that I just did it wrong.
Yes, that's right. So I think there's a
right way and a wrong way and you have to
get it right. Definitely and so I've
experimented quite a bit with keto 2 to
see how my body feels and doing it the
right way and following all the
instructions. There's definitely a huge
difference that like for example one of
the things I discovered everyone know
we said this and but I tried this
recently over the past year as I started
drinking when I don't feel great if I'm
fasting bone broth, chicken bone broth.
And for some reason like magically it
could be, this is the other thing, the
mind I don't know, but it makes me feel
really good. Well it could be the salt.
So I mean neurons, the action potential
neurons as you know is sodium is rushing
into the cell. You need enough extra cell
or sodium in order for your brain and
nervous system to function. And so salt,
I mean unless people have hypertension
salt is great. There was an article in
Science Magazine about a decade ago
about how salt had been demonized and
unless people have hypertension provide
you drink enough water. Salt is great.
You need sodium magnesium and potassium
to function and for your nerve cells to
work. I mean people who over drink
water and don't consume enough electrolyte
die. Now hydration is really important. I
know David's really into hydration.
He's mentioned that a few times. I mean
hydrating properly is key and so you
definitely want to make sure that you're
drinking enough water and getting enough
electrolytes. That I mean we should have
actually talked about that at the
beginning because that's going to keep
your nervous system functioning well.
And a lot of people they'll get shaky or
jittery and when they're fasting and
they'll think they need sugar and if
they just put some salt and some water
they feel fine. And like the other
stuff potassium, magnesium, whatever the
other electrolytes are but yeah. Yeah
those three. So I mean salt yeah.
Magnesium is good before sleep salt.
I mean this is a vast space and we're
kind of talking about the overlap
between neurochemicals, hormones and
nutrition and it's a fascinating space
and it's one that the academic community
has gems up within the textbooks. It
hasn't really made it into the public
sphere yet and I think that's because
people get so caught up in the you know
being are you vegan or are you carnivore
and there's a vast space in between
too that people can explore like I'm
not a competitive athlete so I eat meat
and I also eat vegetables and I eat
fruits and it's just about timing them
but I tend to eat carbohydrates when I
want to be sleepy. I eat them at night
and everyone said that's the worst thing
you can't do that. You sleep great after
eating a big bowl of pasta I'll tell you.
And by the way I should give you a big
thank you for connecting me with Bell
Campo Farms. They sent me some meat
I think because of you and it's delicious.
So I really appreciate that. I mean
it also connected me with this whole
world of people who are doing farming in
this ethical way and like really love
the whole process and like and as from
both like a human level but also
scientific level and the result is
it's like ethical but also delicious
and it makes you think about your diet
in a whole new kind of way. Yeah I've
known I don't have any commercial
relationship to Bell Campo so I can be
very clear. I've known Anya Fernald
who is the founder and CEO of Bell
Campo. I've known her since the ninth
grade. It is true that her parents are
faculty members at Stanford. They're
colleagues of mine but she's just a
serious academic of nutrition but also
of sustainable agriculture of you know
all sorts of things and also the meat
just it's awesome it tastes really good
and no I'm not getting paid to say that
and no they're not a sponsoring my
podcast it's just if you I feel like if
you're gonna eat animals if that's in
your framework and you're gonna eat
animals knowing that the animals were
raised as happy as could be until you
know time of slaughter is at least
important to me. And I actually talked
to her so I will talk to her on this
podcast actually and she invited me
like a week ago out to to visit the
farm in May or June or whatever. Yeah
they have the farm up at the Oregon
board. I haven't been there yet but I've
seen the pictures. It looks awesome and I
was like yes. It looks beautiful let me
know when you're going. Yeah let's go
together. You'll probably run there but
I'll drive there. Yeah but that all that
said I do want to because a lot of
people who are vegan write to me and I
do want to seriously in the same
seriousness that I approached Keto I
do want to go like on a few months
to switch to a vegan diet at some point
to really try it. Yeah I haven't done it
yet because I'm afraid I'm in a function
better. I'm Argentine by my dad's side
and I I don't eat I don't eat meat
super often but well for most people
would it would seem often but but I do
love steak I do so I'm afraid I'm gonna
feel better. There's a social element to
steak you're right because coming from a
Russian background like I can't imagine
going to visit my folks like my parents
for Thanksgiving or something to say
mom and dad I'm you know I don't eat
meat so is it you know. Well I think if
you're gonna eat meat getting it from
sources that are compatible with you
know continuation of the planet is good.
I mean there are some some real problems
with the factory farm meat you know you
drive up and down the five and you pass
that point where are there all those
cows. I mean as somebody who loves
animals it's it's clear that it's you
know you want to limit the amount of
suffering of those animals. Whenever I
hear about you know we have we know
people that hunt and that go and get
their own meat I really admire that I
admire that people do that. We don't we
don't tend to do that in the hills
around Stanford you know they're mountain
lines back there but that's about it
and I'm I'm certainly I admire the
vegan mindset of being of just making
that decision you're just not going to
consume other beings but you know I
haven't gone that way. Performance wise
I'm just curious because I was surprised
I was certain that eating five six seven
meals a day is the right thing to do for
all if you want to be perform your best
when I was like 20 or whatever and I
would eat oatmeal like I thought it's
obvious I have to have a really a lot of
carbs in the breakfast. I had a lot of
preconceived notions and then when I
started eating like once a day this was
at the peak of my competing in jiu jitsu
it was like everything I know about
nutrition is wrong. You realize that
like you have to become a scientist
first of all you have to read literature
you have to learn you experiment but you
also have to become a scientist of your
body and in the same way I have a lot
of preconceived notions of what
performance is like under vegan diet and
I want to do it right like seriously
not not necessarily for the ethical
reasons but to see if it's
performance wise like can I I remember
there's like a fruitarian diet where you
eat fruit only. These extremes are like
they're pretty they're interesting
because people have this need the
extremes are informative though right
I mean well controlled experiments you
eliminate as many variables as you can
except the one you're interested in so
people are running these experiments I
think that
it's hard to imagine getting I know
people say you can get enough amino
acids from plant based sources and I
believe that I think it probably takes
a little more work.
One thing that's really clear is that
the benefit of these omega 3 omega 6
ratios like fish oils and things like
that there are some data that show that
the getting at least a thousand
milligrams of the EPA which is in high
in fish oils but other things too even
some meats and other plants it
in double you know in matched
placebo double blind controlled studies
placebo controlled double blind studies
have shown that those can offset
antidepressive symptoms as much as some
of the selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors like prolac and prozac and
zoloft so that's pretty impressive and
in Scandinavia people know especially
in winter to to consume a lot of those
omega 3s because they're good for you
they're good for the brain.
That's the other question nutrition wise
what kind of stuff have you come across
that's useful like I basically only
take fish oil like you said electrolytes
electrolytes with water the David
Goggins diet fish oil plus fish oil and
then again the sponsor they made it so
easier the sponsor your podcast and
mineathleticgreens.com slash
Hueberman support it.
I don't I don't know like it's great
stuff for sure but also just takes away
the headache of like I don't have to
think about yeah you're gonna get a
bunch of vitamins and minerals
you know does that sounds like a plug
but I have genuinely been buying it
I'm like you know no discount no
affiliation anything since 2012
I think I heard about it on the Tim Ferriss
podcast was like oh I'm gonna try that
stuff and I liked it I mean when I was
starting my lab I was working insane
hours I still work very long hours and
getting sick limits productivity and I
also wanted to train and I wasn't doing
much training back then now I try and
get you know three four sessions in a
week I'm not doing nothing like what
you and David are doing or what you
know Joe does or like you guys are way
more regimented than consistent than I
am
but I think that being healthy and
feeling good is one of the great
benefits to a career is having energy
and just being not sick.
Can we take a step back to uh sleep a
little bit and so people should
definitely look through your podcast
the first five episodes were on sleep
or no I guess the first opening episode
wasn't uh first one was sort of how the
brain works generally is to give people
some background and then we did four
episodes on sleep including some stuff
about food temperature exercise jet lag
shift work for the jet lag folks and
shift work yeah second masterclass on
sleep and then you're going on to a
next topic in the next few episodes
which is incredible well
neuroplasticity we'll talk about it but
on sleep one of the cool things about
the human mind when it sleeps is dreaming
what do you think we understand about
the contents of dreams like what do
dreams mean all the stuff we see when
we dream
is there something that we understand
about uh the contents of dreams
some of it is very concrete so um
Matt Wilson who MIT showed in rodents
and it's been shown in nonhuman primates
and now it's been shown in humans that
there is replay of spatial information
during sleep so initially what Matt
showed was that as these little rodents
navigate through a maze there are these
cells in the hippocampus called place
cells that fire when the animal encounters
a turn or a corridor and that same
exact same sequence as replay during
sleep and it turns out
this is true in uh London taxi cab drivers
before phones and GPS were what they are
today
the London taxi cab drivers were famous
for knowing the routes through the city
through these mental maps and their
analysis of their place self firing
during sleep and during wakefulness and
so we are essentially taking spatial
information about the location of things
and replaying it during sleep however
it's not replayed so that you remember it
all
it's replayed so that if there's a
reason to remember it the links to the
emotional system to the components of
the limbic system and hypothalamus that
are relevant like you've gotten to a
car crash at a particular location or
you lost a bunch of money because you
were a cab driver uber driver we'd say
nowadays
and you were stuck at one particular
avenue all day and frustrated
you're getting yelled at by your spouse
that information gets encoded so that
you never forget that at that particular
time of day and that particular time of
year
and this thing happens so context starts
getting linked to experience so there's
spatial information
that's absolutely replayed during sleep
and we experience this sometimes as dreams
the dreams that happen early in the night
when slow wave sleep or non REM sleep
dominates
tends to be sleep of very kind of
general themes and kind of
location it's a little it can feel a
little bit eerie and kind of strange
in not so incidentally the early phase
of the night is when growth hormone is
released
in the 80s and 90s there was a drug that
was very popular it's very legal now
called ghb
you could actually buy it at gnc or a
store then i never took it but it was a
popular party drug and some people
some famous celebrities died while on
ghb they were also on a bunch of other
things so it's not clear what killed
them but ghb was very big in certain
communities
because it promoted a massive release
of growth hormone and gave people these
very hypnotic states so people go to
clubs and they were in these very
hypnotic states it was part of a whole
culture
that's early night and those dreams
tend to not have a lot of emotional
content or load
that phase of dreaming is associated
with
the occasional jolting yourself out of
sleep because it's somewhat lighter
sleep
this the dreams that occur during REM
during rapid eye movement sleep that
dominate towards morning
are very different they tend to have
very little epinephrine is available in
the brain at that time
epinephrine again being this molecule
stress fear and excitement
you are paralyzed during these REM
dreams
you're you cannot move there's intense
emotion
at the level of what you're feeling and
there's so called theory of mind
theory of mind is an idea that was put
forward by
simon barron cohen sasha barron cohen's
cousin
i think on the podcast i mistakenly said
that he was at uh oxford it's like the
cardinal sin he's at cambridge forgive
me i'm not british but
so the dreams in REM have are heavily
emotionally laden and it's very clear
that those dreams
and REM sleep if you deprive yourself of
them
for too long
you become irritable and you start
linking
generally negative emotions to almost
everything
REM the dreams that occur in REM sleep
are when we divorce emotion from our
prior experiences
and it's when we extract general rules
and themes
uh mit seems to come up a lot today but
it's it's highly relevant susumaton
agawa
no more prize for
amina galavulin but um obviously
fantastic neuroscientists as well
has shown that the replay of neurons in
the hippocampus and elsewhere in the
brain
is kind of an approximation of the
previous episode
and a lot of fear unlearning
of uncoupling emotion from hard or
traumatic events that happened previously
occurs
in REM sleep so you don't want to deprive
yourself of REM sleep for too long
and those dreams tend to be very intense
now epinephrine is low
so that you can't suddenly act out your
dreams
but
what's interesting is sometimes people
will wake up suddenly
while in a REM dream
and their heart will be beating
really really fast
that's a surge of epinephrine that occurs
as you exit REM sleep
so you are having this intense emotional
experience without the fear
you are essentially going through therapy
in your sleep
self induced therapy
it's like trauma therapy
where you're trying to divorce the emotion
from the experience
and
then you wake up
and some people also have the other
component of REM
which is
atonia
which is paralysis
pot smokers
experience this a lot more than non pot
smokers
there's an invasion of
of paralysis into the waking state
I'm not a pot smoker
but I have experienced this
and when you wake up and you're paralyzed
for a second
it's terrifying
but then you jolt yourself
alert
so
the REM sleep is important for
kind of the self induced therapy
and forgetting the bad stuff
it's good for uncoupling the emotions
from bad experiences
and
just
there are two therapies
eye movement desensitization reprocessing
which
is a
eye movement thing that shuts down the amygdala
during therapy
not during sleep
and ketamine
which is a dissociative analgesic
it's actually very similar to PCP
and
ketamine is now being used as
as a trauma therapy when someone comes into
the ER for instance
and they were in a terrible car accident
these are horrible things to describe
but you know
they saw a relative impaled on the driving
steering column or something
and they will give this drug
to try and shut off the emotion system
so that
because they're not going to forget
let's be honest
you don't forget the bad stuff
but it is possible to uncouple
the bad events
from the emotional system
and there's all sorts of ethical issues
about whether or not that's good or bad to do
but the PTSD
is a failure to uncouple the emotion
from these intense experiences
so the goal of this kind of therapy
is
in the uncoupling
for that to be permanent
to
to separate
so they can recount the event
and they can describe it without it
triggering the same somatic experience
of terror and dread
because terror
those feelings can be debilitating obviously
and you're saying
physiologically
in REM sleep
a similar process is happening
that's right
that
thematically
REM sleep is about experiencing
or replaying intense emotions
without experience
the
somatic
the physical component of the emotion
either the acting out
or the accelerated heart rate and agitation
likewise with things like ketamine therapies
that's the ideas
you're uncoupling the physical sensation
from the mental events
what is REM sleep
and why is it so special
maybe we can comment on that
rabbit eye movement sleep
yeah discovered in the 50s
at the University of Chicago
it's
intense brain activity
high levels of metabolic activity
dreams in which people report
a lot of the theory of mind
we were talking about
Simon Baron Cohen
theory of mind
was actually something that he developed
for the diagnosis of autism
if you take kids
most kids of age five six seven
put them in front of a TV screen
in the laboratory
and you have them watch a video
where a kid is playing with a ball or a doll
and then the kid puts it into a drawer
shuts the drawer and walks away
and another kid comes in
and you ask the child
who's observing this little movie
you say
what does this second child think
and a typical kid would say
they want to play
and they don't know where the ball or doll is
or they're upset
or they're sad
they want the doll
autistic children
tend to say
the doll's in the drawer
the toy is in the drawer
they tend to fixate
they can't get in
on the event
they can't get into the mind of that
they don't have a theory of mind
dreams in REM
have a heavy theory of mind component
people are after me trying to get me
you can assign motive to other people
I'm afraid
but it's because
there's an expectation
that doesn't tend to happen
in slow wave sleep dreams
now all this of course is by waking people up
and asking them what they were dreaming about
which from a standpoint of a AI guy
or a machine learning guy
or a neuroscientist kind of like
but it's the best we've got
but brain imaging
in waking states
while people view a movie
and then
brain imaging while people are sleeping
supports the idea that
that's basically what's going on
so REM sleep is amazing
and you're not going to get much of it
during your
about with
Goggins
but you will
afterward
why
so to comment
why won't I
so is it not possible to get into it real quick
only if you're very very sleep deprived
but because you're going to be at
high muscular output
that's going to bias you towards
more slow wave sleep overall
and
your body
and brain are smart
they it will know
they will know
that your main goal is to recover
so you can keep going
so you can keep firing
neuromuscular contractions
and you can keep running
so that you can
I mean it's amazing to think like
why do we ever stop
the unlike weight training
where I can't do a 500 pound deadlift
I just can't
I could train for it
but I certainly can't do a 600 pound
I can't do that
what causes us to stop
an endurance event
is usually not a physical barrier
it's almost always a purely mental barrier
and that's a very interesting problem
I mean that neuroscientists don't tend to
think about those sorts of problems
because it sounds so
non neuroscientific
but that's fundamentally related to the question of
you know
what is pursuit
why what is the the desire to push
and to and to carry on
is there a neuroscientific answer
for that question you think
I think the closest thing is this
um paper from uh
from Janelia Farms
the Howard Hughes Campus
showing that if you put
animals into a simulated environment
where you can measure their effort
the forces on while they're running
and you can look at the
and you can control the visual environment
and you can create a scenario
where the animal thinks that it's
output is futile
it thinks it knows it's running
and it's actually running
but you change the frequency
of the stripes going by
in their visual world
such that they think
they're not getting anywhere
and eventually they quit
and the thing that determines
whether or not they quit
is a threshold level of epinephrine
in the brainstem
if you drop that level back down
or you or you give the animals
dopamine essentially
they keep going
if you take dopamine down
they
they're like this isn't worth it
it's helpless
and they're just
this isn't worth my time and energy
but this is where the difference
between humans
and non human animals
is interesting
because it does feel like humans
have an extra level of cognitive
ability
that might be relevant here
well you can pull from
different time references
so you're in that moment
you're going to need a kit
of things to pull from
so you can think
this is in honor of someone else
that passed away
and you will find a gas reserve
that's amazing
right now
whether or not mice are like
I remember my brother
back in the other cage
when I was a little mouse
you know
we don't know
but it's very likely
that they don't do that
that they're so present
they're in the experience of
there and then and now
that they aren't able to extract
from the past
and they're not able to project
into the future
like how great it's going to feel
when I get to the end
of this really lame VR corridor
I don't think they think about that
and and think about like
if I quit now
how will that have
what kind of effect will it have
on the rest of my life
and the future difficult times
like if you allow yourself to quit
in this particular moment
you'll become a quitter
more and more in life
and then you're going to not get
the other nice
the opposite sex mammals
that's pretty severe
you went there
you took the whole way
to evolution and back again
I mean but that's really it
I mean our ability
to time reference
in the past present
or future
I do believe that we can be in
the present in the past
or the present in the future
or only in the present
or only in the future
only in the past
but I don't think that we can really
think about past present and future
all at once
and this has a similarity to
covert attention
like we can split our visual attention
into two things
we really can duo task
even though we can't multitask
so or we can bring those two spotlights
of attention to the same location
but it's very hard to split our
attention in really well
into three domains
excuse me
I think that that's very very
challenging
and our time referencing scheme
tends to be
just one or two time references
so Lisa Feldman Barrett
I'm not sure if you've done work together
but at least you can
I found out about her
because of you
your podcast with her
and then I brought her onto Instagram
doing an Instagram live
about emotion
and it was fascinating
and she's a very spirited
and very very smart woman
and fearless
and brilliant
so I love her
she's amazing
she kind of
she's not a scholar of hallucinogens
hallucinogens or dreams
but she had this intuition that
there may be a connection
between the kind of dissociation
that happens in dreaming
and that that happens in
like psychedelics
I because of my previous conversation
with you
on this podcast
Matthew Johnson from
John Hopkins reached out
and he said but
he commented I think
on something that we commented on
I don't even remember exactly what
but that there's not many studies
it's not being psychedelics
and not being rigorously studied
in an academic setting
like with a full rigor of science
and he said
well actually
that's exactly what we're doing
and they were extremely well funded now
and it was a been a long battle
to get it accepted
as a serious scientific pursuit
so
but
and I'd like to ask you a little bit
about that
but do you have a sense
about connection between dreams
and psychedelics
or these different explorations
of mind states
that are outside of the standard
normal one
that's the wake mindset?
Yeah I loved your discussion with Matthew
I knew of the Hopkins group
and the stuff they were doing
but I didn't know
much about it at all
and I learned a ton from that podcast
I reached out to him
just to say
love what you're doing
I think it's incredible
so yeah
your podcast has been a great source of
serious academic
and intellectual
conversation for me
I think what they're doing at Hopkins
is amazing
he has a collaborator there
actually they had a very popular paper
I just throw out there for fun
who is a postdoc at Stanford
her name is Ghoul
she's Turkish I believe
and I apologize
her last name escapes me at the moment
but that's just a function of my brain
she had a paper showing
that she put Octopi on MDMA
on XSC
and found out
this was published in
current biology
showing it was a great journal
showing that the Octopi
then wanted to spend more time
with other Octopi
and they started cuddling
so they're colleagues out there
but the Hopkins project
is super interesting
because I think they were initially supported
mainly through private philanthropy
and now
you're starting to see some more interest
at the level of NIH
about psychedelics
it's a complicated space
because the psychedelics are always
looked at
through the lens of the 60s
and people losing their mind
and there's a
I always say
you don't want to Ken Keezy out of the game
Ken Keezy was amazing
right part of the whole beat generation thing
and he was actually at the VA
near Stanford
that's where he eventually in Menlo Park
he wrote One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest
or maybe that was about him
anyway
the comments will tell me how wrong I am
but it's
I think I'm tossing these words in the general
in the right general direction
but
you know
Huxley
Keezy
they did a lot of LST
yeah
and they
all lost their jobs
right
they lost their jobs at big institutions
like Harvard and Stanford and elsewhere
or they left
because they
they made themselves the experiments
yes
Hopkins as far as I know
is when the first place is not the first place where
whatever Matt may or may not be doing in his own life
I don't know
it's really about the patients and whether or not
the patients in these
institutional review board approved studies
whether or not they're getting better
in situations like depression
I think
it's clear that there's a very close relationship
between hallucinogenic states and dreaming
of the sort that were described for REM dreaming
and there's a
a terrific set of books
and body of scientific literature
from a guy named Alan Hobson
who was an MD
is at Harvard Med
and he wrote books like dream drug store
one of the first neuroscience books I ever read
was about hallucinations
and how psychedelics and dreaming are very similar
that was way back when I was in high school
I was just curious
and he really understood the relationship between
LSD and REM dreams
and how similar they are
I think psychedelics
and Matt knows way more about this
than I do of course
but psychedelics
have some very interesting properties
they are certainly not for everybody
right and kids it's a problem
I think the major issues right now
around the psychedelic conversation
is that
it's clear that they can unveil
certain elements of neuroplasticity
they make the brain amenable to change
changing up space time relationships
changing up the emotional load of an event
and being able to reframe that
it's clear that happens
but there's two major issues
one is that
people talk about plasticity
as if plasticity is the goal
but plasticity is a state
within which you can direct neurology
and the question is
what changes are you trying to get to
so people are just taking psychedelics
to unveil plasticity
without thinking about
what circuits they want to modify and how
I think that's a problem
I think there's great potential however
for people opening up these
states of plasticity
with psychedelics or otherwise
and directing the plastic changes
toward a particular endpoint
and there's an absolutely spectacular paper
out of UC Davis
published as a full article in Nature
just a couple months ago
showing that
there are psychedelics that are now
can be modified
so chemists have gotten into the game now
and modifying to take away the hallucinogenic component
where you still get the neuroplasticity components
and for a lot of people it'd be like
oh that's no fun
that's not giving you the wild experience
but I do think that that holds great potential
for people that wouldn't otherwise
orient towards some of these drugs
so I think it's really marvelous
what's happening
and what's about to happen
and I think there is one drug
in that kit of drugs
that's very unusual
like psilocybin, LSD
those promote heavy heavy serotonin release
and lateralized connections ramp up etc
Matt talked about all that
but MDMA, ecstasy, is a very unusual situation
where dopamine is very very high
because of the way the drug is designed
dopamine release it goes through the roof
so people feel great
and they want to move
and they have a lot of energy
but serotonin levels are also high
and that's a very unnatural state
and why MDMA may
may and I want to highlight may
have particularly high potential
for the treatment of certain forms of depression
is an interesting question
because never before in
as far as we know in human history
has there been a possibility
of opening up dopaminergic
and serotonergic states at the same time
dopamine being the molecule pursuit
and reward and more and more
and serotonin being one of bliss
and being content right where you're at
so it's almost like those two things
wrap back on themselves
and create this very unusual state
and I think the bigger conversation
is what to do with a state like that
like do you
is it about self love
is it about developing love for another person
is it about forgetting hate
like these are powerful molecules
and I think if the academic community
and the clinical community
is going to move forward with them in any serious way
I think there needs to be a conversation
about what they're being used for
right and coupled with that
I think similar to what you're saying
like Matt has talked about
as others have talked about
some of the biggest benefits of like progress
whether it's like quitting smoking
and all this kind of stuff
is in the days after
it's the integration of the experience
so maybe you open up the brain
to the neuroplasticity
but then there's like work to be done
it's not
you're like you shake up something
in the biology of the brain
but you have to do then
it's work
absolutely
now a friend of mine who's a physician
he says
who's quite open to this idea
that psychedelics could play a real role
in real medicine
says better living through chemistry
still requires better living
and I think it's a beautiful statement
I wish I had said it
but he gets the credit
but the plasticity window opens
and then as you said
what are you going to do in the two weeks
three weeks four weeks afterward
because that's the real opportunity
but those psychedelic experiences
are really a case of an amplified experience
inside of an amplified experience
so much so that everything seems relevant
and it's fascinating
I mean my hope is that
the AI and machine learning
and the brain machine interface
and all that will eventually be merged
with the psychedelic treatments
so that an individual can go in
take whatever amount
of whatever safe for them
working with a clinician
and really direct the plasticity
while maybe stimulating
the orbital frontal
media orbital frontal cortex
or increasing the observer
or decreasing the observer in the brain
or decreasing the amygdala
I mean it's doable
it's doable with transcranial magnetic stimulation
and it's for shutting down activity
and it's doable with ultrasound
ultrasound now allows very focal activation
of particular brain regions
through the skull noninvasively
so it's approaching the same kind of
therapy from different angles
one of AI is the computational size
sort of injecting
like the robotics injecting
like maybe you can even think about it
as like electricity
the electrical approach
versus then like the chemical approach
absolutely
and then the psychology is subjective
right
so it's going to take some real understanding
of what that person's lexicon is
like you know
that wasn't a pun
sorry
I'm sorry terrible
I'm like the worst
that's the one thing I know
from the feedback on my podcast
my jokes are terrible
but I never claimed to be funny
but somebody who they really trust
and understands when somebody says
for a very stoic person
like I'm imagining
you interviewed the great Dan Gable
I don't know anything about Dan
but can you imagine like you asked Dan
like how you feel about something
while on one of these drugs
and like I mean
his languaging might
if he says that was troubling
it might mean that it was very troubling
or not troubling at all
so people are
languages a poor guide
because if I say I'm upset
how upset is that
well that's very subjective
so you need
we need
can you build a tool for that
can you build an AI tool for that
yeah deeper
yeah well
maybe that's the
I
maybe that's our
that's what the eyes could reveal
so language is not just words
it's everything together
and that's one of the
fascinating things about the eyes
and the window to the soul
I mean they express so much
the face the eyes the body
I mean Lisa talks about that
the communication of emotions
it's a super complex
perhaps there's a bit of a
side fun tangent but
Matt Matthew Johnson brings up DMT
and the experience of DMT is a
from a scientific perspective
just a
just a mystery in itself
over its intensity
what happens to the brain
and of course
Joe
Rogan and others
bring it up as a
very different
special kind of experience
the end elves seem to come up off
I've never tried DMT
what allows for hallucinogenic states
yes
and it
I mean DMT is a really interesting molecule
there there are a lot of people
experimenting now
with DMT
and
they just
the way they've described it
is
as a kind of a freight train
through space and time
very different than the way
people describe LSD type experiences
or psilocybin where
time and space are very fluid
but it tends to be a kind of a
slower
role if you will
so it's clear that DMT is tapping
into a brain state
that's distinctly different
than the other psychedelics
and
and you mentioned jujitsu
and these other communities
I mean it's
I think it's
interesting because
jujitsu is a nonverbal activity
and people get together
and talk about this
nonverbal activity
and they show great love for it
in the same way that surfers
you know
I've known some surfers in my time
and they will get up at the crack of dawn
and drive really really far
to sit in the water
and wait for this wave to come
I have to imagine it's pretty fantastic
I think that
human beings now
some of whom are in the scientific community
are starting to feel comfortable enough
to talk about some of these
other loves and other endeavors
because
they do reveal a certain component
about our underlying neurology
I'm fascinated by
the concept of wordlessness
activities in which
language is just not sufficient to capture
and in which
feel so vital
as a reset
as important as sleep
you know I think that's one of the dangers
of the phone
is not that you're going to get into some online battle
or that you're always staring at the phone
is that
it's a word
so as we read things
we're hearing the script in our head
and I think getting into states
where we are in a state of wordlessness
is very renewing
and replenishing
and just can feel amazing
for and I believe
also can help us tap into
creative states
and allow our neurology to access creative states
and sleep is one such wordlessness
period
so
one of the most interesting things to me
are states that one can approach
in waking non sleep
depressed
wordlessness
through
maybe it's jiu jitsu
maybe it's for some people surfing
maybe it's dancing
maybe it's just
I don't know staring at a wall
who knows
but where the
language components of the brain are completely shut down
and it has to be the case
that drugs are no drugs
that the brain is entering
and starting to
states
and starting to use algorithms
that are distinctly different than when we're trying to
compose things in any kind of coherent way
for someone else to understand
there's no interest in anyone else
understanding what you're experiencing in that moment
and that's beautiful
and I think
I think it's not just beautiful
because it feels good
I think it's beautiful because it's important
and it's clearly fundamental to our neurology
and your sense is
there's a connection between dreams
and DMT and like second doubt
like all of the
you can
you can understand one
by studying the other
so for example dreams
are also very difficult to study right
but they're more accessible
it's safe for the study
and we're told we need to get more of it
whereas with psychedelics
there's this big question mark
is it going to make everyone crazy
is it
is it going to be legal
I mean
it's kind of interesting how
if one looks on Instagram
one could almost think that these drugs are already legal
based on the way that people commute
but they're not yet
there's still a lot of them are scheduling
there's a lot of questions
I mean
and but nevertheless
it's like
my my hope is that
science opens up to these
drugs a little bit more
it's just
I have this intuition that
and like a lot of people share
that they would be able to
unlock deeper understanding
of our own mind
it's any kind of
same as studying dreams
absolutely
well creativity is in the nonlinearities
right
but productivity is in the
implementation of linearities
I mean that's
that's what
is absolutely clear
this is why I think we were talking earlier about
why a formal rigorous training in something
where other people are looking at you
and telling you no not good enough
go back and do it again
there's real value to that
because otherwise it's just ideas
it's just vapors
you know
one thing that Matt mentioned
as the study that they're working on
is as opposed to
I think most of the psychedelic studies
they've done
is on
how to treat different conditions
and one of the things they're working on now
is to try to do a study where
for creatives
for people that don't have a
condition to try and treat
but instead
see how this
how psychedelics can help you create
so like
goodness
if you take creatives
and you give them more psychedelics
they're not going to be able to get out of there right
I don't know
well but this is the
I maybe can speak to that
psychedelics are not
or dreams or tools in general
how to be better creatives
that's an interesting
I don't often see studies of this nature of like
how to take high performance
in the mental
creative space
and get them to perform even
better
so it's not average people
it's like masters of their craft
like taking
I mean his examples was
taking an Elon Musk
which is in the engineering space
and maybe musicians
and all that kind of stuff
and studying that
that's a
I mean that's weird
I usually the science
the scientific exploration there
has been done in
by the musicians themselves
as has been documented
like jazz is like
all non linearities
yeah
but if it's
but the people still have to know
how to play their instruments
right right
there's some early
early skill building
that's critical
I mean
when you
manage someone like Elon
I mean virtual
I mean he's already a virtual so right
because he and in so many different domains
I've never met him
but it's
it's clear right
he
it's not just that he's ambitious
and bold
and brave
and all that
it's all that
and
there's
there's clearly
a different way of looking at the same
problems that everyone else is looking at
and people are probably
banging their head against the refrigerators
and like think differently
things it doesn't work that way
it involved
there's a certain anxiety in
for the
I'm not talking about for Elon
but I don't have no idea
but I think for somebody who's
very structured
very regimented
very linear
the anxiety comes from letting go of those
linearities
and
for the person that's very creative
the anxiety comes from
trying to impose linearities
right
the
really creative artists or musician
they're
they seem nuts
they seem like they can't get their life together
because they can't
and they
you know we look at people who are kind of
pseudo ass burgers or ass burgers
or some forms of autism
and they are so hyper linear
but you take away those linearities
and they freak out
and that's kind of the
essence of some of those syndromes
so I think that
the ability to toggle back and forth between
those states is what's remarkable
I mean
because we're here
and we're having this discussion
I mean Steve Jobs is a good example
he
probably the best example
somebody who actually talked about his own
process
about the merging of art and science
art and engineering
humanities and science
very few people can do that
well I
you seem to have a capacity to do that
I'd like you
you know poetry
and you are AI guy
like you
there's nothing linear about poetry
as far as I can tell
I mean I
I do wonder
just like we've been talking about
if there's any ways to push that
to its limits to
explore further
I don't like leaning
this
this is why I'm bothered
there's not more science and psychedelics
is
I haven't done
almost
so I've
eaten
mushrooms a few times
allegedly
but that's it
you know
and I
the reason I don't do more
the reason I haven't done DMT
is because it's illegal
and it's like not well studied
and it
you know
I'm in those things
and I'm not usually at the cutting edge
but I'm very curious
and it feels like
there could be tools
to be discovered there
not for fun
not for recreation
but for like
encouraging
whether you're linear
thinking to go nonlinear
or it's nonlinear to go linear
like to to shake things up
you mentioned Dan Gable
the idea of Dan Gable on psychedelics
is fascinating to me
because
he's such
a control freak
I mean
he likes control
that I would show up for
that
that would not show up for
but like so much of these psychedelic experiences
it feels like
is
are letting go
that's right
you don't want to resist
but that's supposed
supposedly where the growth is
in in giving
oneself over to the process
and that's
for people who are
like master controllers
he's one of the greatest coaches of all time
it's fascinating to see what that battle looks like
of resistance
and then of letting go
yeah I mean
I I can't wait to
to see where these studies takes us
what's clearly happening
you know I've asked
there I have a couple of colleagues at Stanford
who are doing animal studies
I've asked around
you know it's
there's a lot of discussion
in the neuroscience community
about what the perception of a laboratory is
if they
don't work on psychedelics
I mean
I have to tip my hat
to the folks at Hopkins
they are pioneers
and as
Terry Szygnowski
he's a computational neuroscientist
down at Salk says
I don't think he was the first person to say he says
you know how to spot the pioneers
they're the ones with the arrows in their backs
yeah
and you know it's
it's an unkind world
to a scientist
that's trying to do
really cutting edge stuff
my colleague
David Spiegel
who studies medical hypnosis
it's he's got
dozens of studies now
showing that
hypnosis can be beneficial
for pain management
anxiety management
cancer outcomes
and it's finally
you know
at the point where
there's so much data
but people hear hypnosis
and they think of stage hypnosis
which is like the furthest thing
from what he's doing
and
I think
mind body
type stuff
hypnosis
respiration
and breathing
I think the hard science
walk into the problem
is always going to be best
to get the community on board
and then
it's up to people like Matt
and
to really
you know take it to the next level
and as I say not
Keesey out of the game
because Keesey basically
was taken too much
of his own stuff
and he started dressing
crazy of banana hats
and like you see him
he had the magic bus
so you know the day
so like the day I start
driving to work
in the magic bus
that's the day I lose my job
where you're gonna
I'm not into buses
or or or
wearing fruit
but um
you're gonna get a phone call
for me
and I hope you do the same for me
it's like
like
dude what are you doing
well what's interesting
earlier we're talking about
the challenge with David
that you're about to do
I mean
that is a psychedelic experience
of sorts
because you're biasing your mind
towards a pretty extreme
neurochemical state
and you don't know
what you're gonna find there
and that's kind of the excitement
at least for me
as an observer
it's like
I want to know
what
what the experience
is like
afterward
I want to know like
how was it
I mean I'm sure
you're gonna get something
like you said
you're gonna grow
the question is how
and not resisting
I mean it's the same as
with a psychedelic experience
it's like
not
like
giving yourself over completely
to the experience
and not resisting
and going through
the whole mental journey
of whether it's
anger
or excitement
or exhaustion
the whole thing
it's uh
I mean
that's
the entirety
of the process
that David goes through
when he does
his own challenges
and so on
is that whole journey
he finds purposely
like
missile seeks
the limits of the mind
that that
whatever the resistance
is felt
runs up against it
and then goes to
the full journey
of going beyond it
and seeing
what's there
on the other side
well stress has these
two sides
the limbic friction
of being tired
and needing to get
more energized
that's one form of stress
and then there's the
feeling too amped up
and needing to calm down
the typical
discussion around stress
is one thing
but it's all limbic friction
it's just that
when I say limbic friction
that's not a real
scientific term
I just mean
the limbic system
wanting to pull you down
into sleep
or wanting to put you
into panic
and you
using
top down processing
using that
evolved
forebrained to say
I'm not going to go to sleep
and I'm not going to freak out
and those top down
control mechanisms are
I mean when those get honed
that's beautiful
because then you
you're increasing
capacity for everything
you
uh
this month on the podcast
you're talking about
neuroplasticity
you mentioned
in a bunch already
is there something you're
looking forward to
specifically
like
something maybe you're
fascinated by
that jumps to mind
about neuroplasticity
this fascinating
property of the brain
yeah I think that
it's clear there's
one facet of neuroplasticity
that is very well supported
by the research data
that hardly anyone
is implemented
in the real world
and that's the release
of acetylcholine
from these neurons
in the forebrained
called nucleus basalis
this is mainly the work
of Mike Mersenek
who used to be at UCSF
and some of his scientific
offspring Greg Reckon's own
and Michael Kilgard
and others
what they showed was
increases in acetylcholine
this molecule
associated with focus
in concert
meaning at the same time
is some
event
motor event
or music event
or any kind of
sensory event
immediately
reorganizes the neocortex
so that there's a permanent
map representation
of that event
and I
I absolutely believe
that this can be channeled
toward accelerated skill
learning
and my friend and colleague
Eddie Chang
who's now the
chair of neurosurgery
at UCSF
but also a fine scientist
in his own right
not just a clinician
he's doing
studies looking at
rapid acquisition of language
using these principles
he trained with Mersenek
it's clear we have these
gates on plasticity
in the forebrained
and they are gated by
nicotinic acetylcholine
transmission
and why that hasn't made it
into protocols
for
motor learning
sport learning
language learning
music learning
emotional learning
I don't know
I think part of the reason
has been
kind of cultural
is that scientists
publish their paper
and they move on
Mersenek
talked a lot
and still
can be found
from time to time
talking about
how these
plasticity mechanisms
can be leveraged
but
he had a commercial company
and so then people
kind of backed away
from it a little bit
I think he was
to be honest
I think
Mersenek was ahead of his time
and I think the timing is
right now
for people to understand
these mechanisms
of plasticity
and start to implement them
also
you know
it all sounds like
becoming superhuman
or optimizing
or whatever
all that
yes
but also
what about kids
with language
learning deficits
or with dyslexia
or just performance
in school in general
I mean I have a deep
interesting concern
for the future of science
and mathematics
and in
not just in this country
but all over the world
and more plasticity
equals faster
better deeper learning
and if we don't do this
I don't think we're going to get
the full reach
out of all the
machine learning tools either
because
everyone talks about these huge data sets
and
but those huge data sets
funnel into human interpretation
I mean we don't just like
stare at the numbers
and bask right
so some
the human brain
I think needs to
leverage these
plasticity mechanisms
to keep up with
the thing that's happening
very very fast
which is technology development
so that's a long winded way of saying
basal forebrain
colonergic transmission
and plasticity
it
allows for plasticity in adulthood
and it allows for
single trial learning
which is incredible
but
how do we leverage that
like
in the
physical space taking actions
or is there some chemicals
that can stimulate
stimulate neuroplasticity
like what
I think it's the intersection of the two
I think it's being engaged
in a physical practice
while enhancing pharmacology
and it has to be done safely
and this is full of open questions
this is the very beginnings
of it like you're saying
yeah a pill
that's safe
that increases
nicotinic transmission
I mean I know a number of people
that chew Nicorette
actually I have a
Nobel Prize winning colleague
at
Columbia
not to be named
who chews like six pieces of Nicorette
and a half hour conversation with him
and he
started doing that as a replacement
for smoking
because smoking
is nicotine, nicotinic stimulation
of the
colonergic system
so smokers have long known
that increases focus
and attention
and learning
it's just that the lung cancer thing
is a barrier
now I'm not suggesting people
take Nicorette
but it's clear that
we need
better directed pharmacology
but
you can imagine next time
you go in for a learning bout
if it's really essential
you might want to stimulate
the nicotinic system
if that's safe for you
again I'm a doctor
so again I'm not telling people
to do this
but that's where it's going
until we start merging
machines with pharmacology
and behavior
it's
it
we're just kind of walking around
in the circle over and over again
and it's going to happen
do you find
computer vision
machine learning
from the perspective of tooling
as an interesting tool for
analyzing
for processing
all the data
from the neuroscience world
from the
neurobiology
biology
the camera
all the different data sets
that you can have
about the mind
the eye
the
everything that's neck and above
and also the central nervous system
and all
absolutely
I mean
I think that
computer science and engineering
and chemistry
bioengineering is
that's what's creating
the acceleration and progress
in neuroscience right now
I think it's actually one place
where
science
I'm very reassured
science has
been invited in
psychologists
computational biologists
at least at Stanford
MIT
and
and other places too
of course
it's clear that
it's a
everyone's invited kind of party
right now
that the major issue
in the field of neuroscience
at least
through my view
is that there's no conceptual leadership
no one is saying
we need to work on
and solve this problem
or that problem
it's very fragmented right now
now the good news is
people are communicating
so
computer scientists
and people who work on AI
machine vision
are talking to biologists
and vice versa
but
it's very dispersed
is there a lot of different data sets
like it will
in your work
that you've just come across
is there a huge number of
disparate data sets
around neuroscience and so on
or
well there's a lot of cell sequencing stuff
so the brode
over at
you know
in Boston
and then
on this coast
the Chen Zuckerberg initiative
what you know
they did
three billion dollars to
sequence every cell type
in humans and in animals
and trying
I think their goal is to
cure every disease
by some date
I don't know in the
in the future
huge data sets
of gene expression
and protein expression
that's valuable
I think
no one really knows
how to think about neural circuits
and what
what is a neural circuit
is it one structure
is it two structures
communicating
I think
this is where I actually think
that the robotics
is going to
tell us
how the brain works
because it's tempting to think
that the brain
has all these cell types
and circuits in order to solve
specific problems
but it might be that
the fundamental algorithm
is to create cells and circuits
that can solve
variable problems
when we know in the retina
just a very simple example
is that
we've always heard about like
cones are for color vision
and high acuity
and rods are for night vision
and
non color vision
but
at the dusk dawn
transition
certain cell types switch
to do completely different
have a complete different function
for viewing starry night
versus
what they do during the daytime
so
neurons multiplex
and I think building
machines that can multiplex
and can evolve themselves
is going to
help us really understand
what the brain is doing
we
need to tease out the fundamental
algorithms
we know they're like
motion detection
and spatial vision
and things like that
I think machines are going to
be much faster at that than
our understanding of
biology
and how the brain does that
basically I'll be out of a job
and people like you will have a job
well no
I think the main idea is that
there won't be a job
that's machine learning
or
computer vision
it's just
it's a tool that
neuroscientists will
use more and more and more
and
biologists would use
I mean this whole idea that
it will just be a
tool
that allows you to start
expanding the kind of things
you can study
well the next generation
coming up
I can say this because
I now am blessed to have a
bioengineering student
they think about problems so
differently
than biologists do
we realize the other day
we both came up with a set of
ideas around a certain project
and we realized that
her version of it was the
exact opposite of mine
you know
and hers was far
far more rational
it's just an engineering
perspective
it's like why would we
do that last
we should do that first
I think that the
the next generation is
really interested in
solving practical problems
it's a lot like computer
science and engineering was
in the late 90s
it was like
you can go do a PhD
in computer science and engineering
maybe
or you go work for a company
and actually build stuff
that's useful
I think neuroscientists
and people interested in
neuroscience
are starting to think
how can I build stuff
that's useful
and this is
statement is supported
by the fact that many
people in my business
leave their academic labs
fortunately not all of them
but they leave their academic labs
and they go work for companies
like Neuralink
this is something I think
with they've spoken a few times
offline
about
as
let me speak of computer vision
I'm fascinated by the eye
I did a bunch of work on the eye
so from
there's the neuroscientists
there's a neurobiology way
of studying the eye
and there's the computer vision
way of studying the eye
and the computer vision way
of studying the eye
of just like observing
noncontact sensing of humans
is really fascinating to me
in studying human behavior
in different contexts
like in semi autonomous vehicles
it seemed like
there's a lot of signal
that comes from the eye
that comes from blinking
that's not fully understood yet
it's been in the lab
it's been used quite a bit
to study like the dilation
of the pupil
all those kinds of things
are used to
to infer workload
cognitive load
all those kinds of things
but the pictures is murky
it's not completely well understood
especially in the wild
how much signal you can get
from the eye
from the human face
I've downloaded Joe Rogan's
all of the podcasts he's ever done
video
you have the youtube bank
I have the youtube bank
for a reason that
this was before he went
with Spotify
you own the archive
there's PubMed
and then there's the Joe Rogan experience
owned by
or maintained by Lex
for my private collection
no the reason I did it
and I did the rigorous processing of it
which is like
I extracted all of the faces
I did the really good
blink track
of the pupil tracking
and the blink detection
for the entirety
I should say it's from episode
like
I forget what it is
but it's like episode 900
when they switched to 1080p video
it was like much crappier video
it's still kind of
you log when there was marijuana consumption
or when there was drinking
when there's smoke
I mean there's so many
because that's gonna like
just it won't throw off the data
but it's relevant to the pupil data
so let's just put it this way
there's a lot of fascinating
computer vision problems involved
but I only kept long sequences of data
where the eyes detect exceptionally well
and I also removed people
that were wearing glasses
I removed
there's certain people
that have a way of moving their eyes
and squinting
where it's harder to infer
like concrete blinks
you know
they'll kind of have a squint
the whole time
and their blink is very light
it's very tough to know
what's an actual blink
so I wanted to
then you got those baseball cap
wearing guys
baseball cap
there are certain people that go on podcasts
and wear baseball caps
and don't reveal their
I don't know if they realize it or not
until it comes out
but their face is completely obscured
from vision
and from a computer vision perspective
people that wear makeup
and usually women on their eyes
it complicates things
like eyelashes all complicate things
so you can clean stuff up
just so you have really crisp signal
you don't have to
you can deal with issues
but there's so many hours
of Joe Rogan video
anyway I say all that
because I was searching for
an interesting personal experiment
for me because
I saw in drivers
when I was looking at
eye movement in drivers
it seemed to indicate
there seemed to be quite a lot of signal there
that indicates
amount of cognitive load
but it's not clear
if there's something conclusive
but if there is some signal
that's a really powerful one
because eye movement
can be detected in the wild
like you and I sitting here
I can detect eye movement really well
pupil dilation
is a really crappy indicator
and it's luminance dependent
like if I turn toward a light
it's around
it
pupils change size
depending on level of alertness
arousal, autonomic arousal
but also overall levels of luminance
it's very very hard
but there are
I mean you're sitting on a gold mine
because there is a lot of interest right now
in measuring state
through noncontact sensing
yes
heart rate variability
through changes in skin tone
just off a camera
can you imagine that
at the point where
you just look at some video
and you're like oh they're
they're getting more stressed
or worked up
and they're not
based on a heat map
of some little patch on their face
because everyone's gonna
have this slight
you know sort of
compartmentalize it slightly differently
but you can learn it pretty quickly
we know this when someone's like
giving a talk
and we see them starting
blotching on their
neck you know
this is the like
the thesis defense response
right
we know it
and it's a stressful situation
because it's not passing
your thesis defense is rough
and we can see that
but cameras can pick that up
really easily
at much lower levels
than the
the blatant blotching
kind of effect
and eye movements
certainly are powerful indications
of the state of the autonomic system
so what do you
do you think there are things
from a high level
that you can pick up
from eye movement
and blinking
well blink frequency
is going to increase
as people get tired
right
I mean they've actually
been teased a lot online
because I don't blink much
when I'll do a post
and I
and so I did a whole post
about blinking
about the science of blinking
there's some data
very strong data
not from my lab
that show that
every time you blink
it resets your perception of time
they have people do these
kind of track a
kind of a Doppler like thing
and anyway
blinking resets your perception of time
that there's a dopaminergic mechanism
in a
in the blink related circuitry of the brain
when people are very alert
they tend to not blink very much
when we're sleepy
we tend to blink more
and our eyes tend to close
now some people are more hooded
in there
the way their eyes sit
some people
are like this all the time
there are some very famous people
I'm not going to name them
because I
might run into them at some point
who are like
accused of being sociopaths
because they don't blink very often
but they might just have
high levels of autonomic arousal
they just don't blink very much
also depends on how lubricated the eyes are
so I think within individual
yes
you can get a lot of information
I don't think we can say
this person's blinking a lot
they're lying
this person or they're tired
this person doesn't blink
they're
stressed
I think
if you
understand that person's baseline
you can get it
and presumably
well having been on the Joe Rogan experience
I can say when you first sit down there
if you've never been in there before
you're on my day to say by the way
oh my
well I bet you I
I will admit to being
you know
first time
sitting down there
I mean Joe is
incredibly gracious
make me feel very comfortable there
but
yeah it's a
it's an intense experience
it's a small space too
anytime you enter a small space
from a big space
in this old studio
is it
you're familiar with
there's a breaking in period
where you're getting
to know somebody
and so I'm sure my levels of autonomic
arousal
front of the podcast
we're higher than later
so but once you have a baseline
established
you can get a lot of data
on somebody
simply from blinks
some people averting gaze too
if you have both people
that's really powerful
this is the holy grail
another holy grail of neuroscience
we've mainly looked at subjects
in isolation
isolation
there hasn't been
much brain imaging of two people
in interacting
or even
in animal models of two mice
or two monkeys interacting
it's all like person scanner
bite bar
I mean if you've ever been in one
of these scanner
you're like in a bite bar
it's very medieval
and so you think
in the interaction
there's actually
you can almost study them
as a single brain
or as a single system
the two brains are a single system
I think with AI
it's highly correlated
yeah maybe
are your blinks triggering my blinks
like you know
are your non blink epochs
extending my non blink epochs
there's a fascinating space
to explore there
and no one's done it
and because everyone
let the
Joe Rogan Experience archive
disappear
except for you
you grab
well actually
did you get the comments too
because I think the comments were
almost as entertaining
as the conversation
you know what you just made me
realize with the couplings
I have a better data
than the Joe Rogan podcast
with high resolution video
which is the raw video
for this podcast
so for example
both cameras right now
are recording you and I
full full feed
the final result
will switch cameras back and forth
but I have the full feed
right
so I can have the blinking
for both you and I the whole time
I bet you people trigger
blinks
and in one another
you know
and there's also like the
the simplest way to think about
the blinks
and the attentional thing
and the alertness is
two fighters in the
in the standoff
there's this whole lore around
who blinks first
yeah
it's like they blink first
well
what are what are we really asking
they're asking whether or not
one person can maintain focus
longer than the other person
which
is an important parameter
it's not the only parameter
but it's an important parameter
and so that blinking contest
even though they don't square off
as a blinking contest
it's well known that the first to
blink
is revealing something about their
capacity to hold attention
you've started an amazing podcast
that we mentioned a few times
people should definitely check it out
it's called the Huberman Lab Podcast
it
it does your
it's basically
it embodies
the personality of Andrew Huberman
which is like
makes science accessible
but also
fascinating
and giving it like
what do you call it
you give tools for everyday life
meaning
it kind of grounds it like
what the hell does this mean for my life
but then also does the beauty of science
at the same time
so I love
I love both the
the rigor and the openness of the whole
thing
plus the whole corrections thing
as I mentioned
anyway
what's been the hardest part
of this whole process
you're one of
already
one of
the only
and one of the best
science
podcasters out there
so in that process
what's been the hardest
what's been the most exciting part
wow
well first of all
thanks for the
kind words about the podcast
it was inspired by you
I
absolutely
it's
that's no BS
I
the last time
we met to do an interview for your podcast
we talked a little bit about it and
you gave me the
subtle
nudge that maybe there was a
there was a podcast there
and I thought about it and I left
and I was just like
I gotta do this thing
and
and you really gave me the encouragement to do it
and your podcast
this podcast has really forged the way
you've been
tip of the spear on
serious
scientific
intellectual
yet fun
accessible conversation
and so
I
as
your colleague
and friend
and but
just even if
those things weren't true
like this this podcast was
and is the inspiration
there's no question
so much
yeah
I really like 100%
and
when I decided to do the podcast
the
Hebrew Lab podcast
I thought really long and hard about what
would work best
and would be most beneficial
turned out to be the hardest thing
which is to stay on a single topic
for three or four or more episodes
before switching to a new topic
because
I know from the experience of
university and teaching in university
as you know
as well that
there's always the temptation to pivot to something else
but the
drilling into something really deeply
is where the
where the gems reside
and
the
the challenge has been
how to make it interesting
how to keep people on board
how to give people tools along the way
but also stay close to the scientific data
I like to think that we're headed in the right direction
it still needs to evolve
but
that's been a challenge
I think
I also am challenged by the fact that there's a tremendous
range of backgrounds of listeners
so some people have asked for
more names
like more bits and parts of the nervous system
and cellular molecular mechanisms
and all that kind of thing
and other people said
I don't understand any of that stuff
but I think I'm keeping up and so
unlike a university course where there are prerequisites
and everyone's coming to the table
with more or less the same knowledge
I have a very limited sense of what the audience
knows and doesn't know
so that's why I incorporated the feature
of the comment section on YouTube
being a source of feedback
and I do a
kind of an office hours like episode
every third or fourth episode
where I address common questions
and I think that the podcast space
in my mind
at least for the sort of podcast I'm doing
needed a venue for the listeners
to be a
more integral part of the experience
as opposed to just commenting on what they liked
or didn't like. So while I like to hear what people
liked and didn't like
I also really like to hear about
hey tell me more about
temperature minimums
and how they can be used to phase shifts
circadian rhythms or whatever it is
and I realized that I'm probably losing
some people along the way
but hopefully
at the end of each month
and because of the way that the episodes are archived
people will come away feeling
as if they've learned a ton
and they have tools that they can implement
and perhaps most importantly
that they're starting to think scientifically
about the tons of other stuff that's out there.
So that's been the challenge
and it's still really early days
but and of course
there's also an intentional challenge
I realize that people are busy
not everyone has two hours
to listen to a podcast
about jet lag and shift work
and raising kids and sleep
and that kind of thing
I'm not raising kids
but I did a whole thing
about babies and sleep with
and how parents can manage their sleep
when kids aren't sleeping.
So it's been
I'm hacking through the jungle
of all this stuff
but and I'll come right back to
my inspiration
and my north star on this
is getting to a point where
the audience that listens to this
feels the same way that I do
when I listen to your podcast.
Thank you so much.
Like when I turn into your podcast
I'm going to embarrass you a little bit more
by complimenting you a little bit more
but not out of a sadistic thing
but just because
when I tune into your podcast
or Joe's podcast
I have the same sensation
that other people have
like I feel like
I'm home of sorts
I'm like I'm familiar with the space
and I'd like people to feel comfortable
in the space that is the
Huber and Lab podcast
whatever that ends up being.
Yeah that's the magic of podcasting
it's like I feel like
I'm part of your life now
in a way that as a fan
that I wouldn't be otherwise
and you know like
I never was able to have that
with Carl Sagan for example
and that's a whole another level
of connection with a human being
that gets you excited
and then I share your excitement
about different topics in neuroscience
or just biology in general
and then I don't have to actually
understand everything you're saying
to to really enjoy it
so that's the magical podcasting
is like you can go through
like 10 minutes of
understanding what the hell
a person is saying
and then you enjoy the excitement
and then you reconnect to a thing
that you do understand
what they're saying
and you know that's
that personal coupled
with the scientific rigor
is magic
and finding the right
it's exploration
like Joe found something
that works for comedians
which is like
you know having a good laugh
but also every once in a while
talking seriously
about difficult topics
the scientific space
it was unclear
you haven't had guests on
not yet
but uh
maybe you'll come on as a
that's wrong
I was gonna invite
I was gonna try to force myself in there
I am
I'm officially inviting you now
will you come on the podcast?
I would love to
fantastic
but it was it was hard
it's still a little bit difficult
to tell people
that no you don't get it
we're not gonna talk for 10 minutes
we're gonna talk for
three or four hours
it's a different for scientists
for like
they're like what
I don't what are we gonna talk about?
they think it's like the NPR interview
yes
and they don't realize
first of all
I think at his best
if you're like at the level of Joe Rogan
who I think is an excellent
conversationalist
it you just lose track of time
it can be three four or five hours
and you lose track of time
I'm still not there
I find that
it's still painful
like the conversation
is still challenging sometimes
you don't lose
quite as much of track of time
it's still an intellectual effort
and I think it might always be
as it would be with you
because you're talking about
difficult topics
maybe that require more brain
you're not
just shooting the shit
with like a Brian Red Band
or somebody like comedians
are just joking
well it's like
remember those shows
like where
those shows where someone would come out
and like spin plates
and they're running back and forth
and so
really good scientific discussion
is like that
you have to be maintaining
three or four different logical arguments
and jumping back and forth
it's occasionally
getting to like a real streak of linearity
but
as we found today
that typically
there's three or four different things
that we're bouncing back and forth from
and that requires
a lot of updating of these
you know for brain circuits
it's not
it's not a passive listening experience
but
I like to think that the brain likes that
I do want to ask
because we all
I don't want to forget
the question came up to me
is your podcast
has the same kind of rigor
that I think like a Dan Carlin podcast
has
who's a history podcaster
well that's a
definitely a compliment
thank you
it feels like
Dan's Dan's way
you know
he's something for me to aspire to
so he goes through hell to prepare
he spends
months preparing
it feels like
you've had to really prepare for your podcast
I definitely
prepare hard
how
does that
are you okay
yeah I
I mean how much effort does that take
it feels like a conference presentation
yeah so we record once a week
and in the intervening time
I
listen to
many
university level lectures
so NIH has a
a bank of lectures
I have some sources of
recorded university seminars
I'm trying to find the
the points of intersection
so like for four episodes on sleep
it's not like I'm going to
just regurgitate a popular book
or take one lecture and just
you know
poach the content
I'm going to
find the overlap
in the different elements
I also
so what I'll do is I'll generally
read
10 or 15
to papers
and generally those are good reviews
annual reviews
and a review of neuroscience
annual review of physiology
those kinds of things
I'll chase a few references
I'll listen to some YouTube videos
but of university level lectures
and then
I throw all that on a whiteboard
usually while I work out in the morning
I'll just be working out
I have a gym in my house
and I'll just put up
all these random ideas
I want to cover that
dreams hallucination
and then I take that
and I start to eliminate
I draw lines
between the common points of intersection
and then from that
I distill out and outline
and then I basically
think about what I want to say
on my walks with my dog
and I bother a couple people
and blab to them
so I would say each podcast
yeah I put in 10 to 15 hours
at least of passive listening
preparation
and maybe five or six
of active preparation
so I do prepare quite a lot
but it has a certain reward component
for me
I to come up at the end
with something that's
somewhat crystallized
for me is just so satisfying
it feel like there's something
about my dopamine circuits
that just love that
and the only pain is that
a year later
after I've talked about the stuff
a bunch of times
it's so much more succinct
but that's life
at some point
you got to pull the trigger
well I don't know what you think
but for me YouTube
is that's why I'm sad that Joe left YouTube
there's a archival nature to YouTube
that's kind of magical
and so I'm really glad you're now
you're doing a lot of educational content
on Instagram before
but now
doing this podcast thing on YouTube
it's like a
you know
it's like Feynman lectures
like
well that's very
I'm not saying every podcast
but there will be
you will have some
I could already tell
there'll be some lectures
which are like
definitive
like really special ones
that's the hope
and there's some aspect
that's archival to YouTube
where at least I hope
like 20 years from now
some kid is going to watch
watch a lecture of yours
and you know
it'll create the next Nobel Prize
right
it'll create
it'll create another
you know
a dream that then becomes a reality
and then that's a
that's a special thing
that the YouTube provides
I'm really excited that you're on YouTube
and at the same time
I'm excited to see where this thing goes
because
it seems like change is the
the cliche thing
the change is the only constant
in these times
because
you're paving
with this podcast
with this creativity
what you were doing on Instagram as well
you're paving the new era
of what it means to do science
so actively doing research
and actively explaining that research
in new media
it's
it's very interesting
just inspired
genuinely inspired by you
we had this discussion last time
after the podcast recording
and it was
it's clear that communication of science
cannot be left
to the
the
existing institutions
and I'm going to talk about universities
I just mean that the
science section of newspapers is
sometimes there's some gems there but
generally it goes
you know
and
yeah I think you really have to know a field
in order to extract the best things from that field
and
my hope is that other
practicing scientists
and people finishing their PhD
and postdoc
and people who are running labs
or working at companies
will start to do this
I mean how amazing would it be for instance
if
if someone at Neuralink
was
giving us hints about
not necessarily what they're developing
because that's
complicated for all sorts of reasons but
would
talk to us about
what the real challenge is
of building
futuristic
brain machine interface
are like
and
and what the
what it means to understand a clinical problem
and address it
I mean
I
my hope is somebody there
might eventually do that
that somebody in the world of
chemistry
or synthetic materials
or whatever it is
will do this in a way that I could understand
because I don't have
expertise in those
I think
it would be marvelous
and
you were tip of the spear
you were out first
and
I'm just
happily trying to
to move along in the direction I'm going
but I
I think the future of science education
is online
and
I think that's going to be scary to a lot of
existing institutions
but it's not about
disrupting anything
it's just about trying to do things better
yeah
you know some of the best
interviews
some of the best
investigative journalism
is done by people inside the field
comes to mind a guy by the name of Elon Musk
who
who uh
I love the the possibility
that he gets a poll
it's there for that interview
but uh
he grilled the crap out of Vlad
the uh CEO
Robin Hood
I'm not sure if you know
oh and um
on the clubhouse
on clubhouse the other night
yeah I saw you guys in there
I was kept out
I wasn't quick enough
my thumb doesn't go fast enough
so I was
and I wasn't about to sit in the waiting room
have you tried that social network
by the way the clubhouse
I've gone in there a few times
and check some things out
I'm there
I have a few questions about it that
like if I'm in there
where
it
how one
can participate
or not participate
I
I like being a fly on the wall
for those conversations
I've been very curious
as to what's going on in there
oh it's quite
I mean I have a lot of thoughts
I've
maybe it's useful to comment
I also have a discord server
that uh
you know has
a few tens of thousands of people on it
and then
they have
also a voice
chat capability
so there's these get togethers
and I
I was using it in
in the spring and summer
like actively
on those voice discussions
and it's
anywhere from 10 to like a thousand people
all together in voice
like you
anyone can speak
anytime right
but there's this weird dynamic
that people stay quiet
only one person speaks at a time
interesting
because they're all like respectful
and it's a community of like
like
fundamentally respectful people
even though they're all anonymous
so like
except like me and a few others
it's all anonymous people
so interesting
and it works
it's
but the
the magical thing to me
about
that community
was how intimate
voice only communication can be
it felt
as intimate as
like a
like a small get together
at a home
with close friends
it felt like there's a calmness to it
and you're revealing things about
about you know
somebody suffering from depression
or being suicidal
so those are the dark things
or being super excited
getting a new girlfriend
or boyfriend
like just the depth of human experience
shared on voice
without video
is uh
I was really surprised how intimate that is
for human connection
especially in this time of COVID
it replaced that
so that
so just to give you some context
there's something there
there's definitely something there
one thing that
comes to mind is
when like in clubhouse
you have your little icon
so they don't actually
you don't see your face moving
I think when people see their own image
it puts them in a state of self consciousness
that is eliminated
by just having an icon
or an avatar
yes
right
so like zoom
is dreadful
because if
I'm not used to talking to people
and seeing a little image of myself
staring back at me in the mirror
and
it's just
I know there are ways that you can adjust that
but it's really awful
and I think that
when I get on zooms now
I say hello
and then I shut down
the video component
and then I just talk in the end
I come back on
just to show that
still there
it's told me
but
I think that
voice only is really interesting
Eddie Chang
would be an interesting person
to talk to about this
because he understands
so much about
how inflection communicates
emotionality
in deeper state
but there's a balance between
I think just like you said
there's the privacy
somehow
allows for the intimacy
so like being able to
to
uh
as opposed to putting on an act
which I realized we do
when we're visually presenting ourselves
in remote communication
but I think that
there's so few places
where people can actually
communicate without
the fear of penalty
yes
those
that's
you know
woefully
absent these days
and so maybe people are just
relieved to be in a place
where they feel like
I can say what I want
or not say anything
and it's okay
and so
so clubhouse
as you to answer your kind of
question is
there was a big improvement
to me over discord
which is
it has tears
is
it has a stage
where people
the person that created the room
can invite people up
that would like to speak potentially
have the opportunity to speak
and then there's a bigger audience
that don't get a chance to speak
unless they
click raise their hand
and then get called on
so there's like a tier
system
that allows for there to be
a group of like
five, 10, 20, 30 people talking
and a lot larger
amount in the audience
which in discord
is the problem
is that everybody could talk
and the other thing about clubhouse
is everybody
is strongly encouraged
to represent themselves
so you're using your real name
it's not anonymous
and how many people were in that
GameStop discussion the other day
they currently
limit rooms to five thousand
so I'm sure maxed out of five thousand
there's a lot of overflow rooms
this is the cool thing
about clubhouse
really big people were on there
all tuned in
and having a conversation
having all from
you know
all these different worlds
being able to connect
even though
without the niceties
of like arranging the meeting
you could just show up
and leave
which is nice
but the reason I'm
for my lessons from discord
I'm going to mostly stay away
from clubhouse
and I think
we're going there under another name
right
I'll pretend I know the actual
your actual name one
yeah
is I've learned
it's quite addicting
it's a time sink
it's so
the intimacy of it
is you find yourself wasting
quite a bit of time on there
it pulls you in
well it's interesting
the
which
in sort of going back to the podcast
or earlier we were talking about books
or creating a technology
one thing that's absolutely clear
is that anything
that's easy to reproduce
is probably not worth
much effort
and time
yes
right I mean
most posts
could be easily reproduced
you just repost them
yeah
so
now there are some original posts
that for which the attribution
goes to the original person
and it's clear it came from you
but anything that can be easily
reproduced is
doesn't really expand us very much
as individuals
or or as groups
and most of what I see on social media
is stuff that could
is is purely reproduced
yes right
but
I think clubhouse
I mean
it could be that some real magic
emerges on there
so in moderation
it could be good
the magic is
this is another thing
that I've found
through COVID
that maybe you can think about
is live
I used to be
not understand the appeal
of live video
or live connection
or like in this clubhouse
live events
because clubhouse
is technically
for the most part
it's not supposed to be recorded
most people don't record
most conversations
it's a one time live event
and there's a magic to that
there is
that's not captured by
like your podcast
or
my podcast
produced video
that's like
recorded
like packaged up
well anything can happen
it's that anything can happen
and those
that's the kind of thing
like live concerts
and I definitely
I love live music
and it's the idea that
because you can always listen
to the album
actually the album usually
sounds cleaner and better
but it's just this idea
that anything can happen
and then you listen to like
the parts
I don't know you
like Castello did something weird
your dog did something weird
and then you have to go
god damn it
you have to go to the kitchen
or something
to get something
and then you come back
and it's funny
I watched a live video like that
of people
and I'll be there for the whole time
I'll wait for them
to go to the kitchen
and come back
it's not like I tune out
right
and that makes it like
a richer experience
for some reason
it's weird
well it humanizes it
yeah humanizes it
and I think there is this
weird effect of
whether or not
it's a podcast
Instagram
or Twitter
or anything else
there's kind of like
two people shouting
into a tunnel
and then a bunch of people
with ears at the other end
of those tunnels
and shouting
some things back
and you know that's
that's kind of the format we're in
I think
I'll check out Clubhouse again
I've gone in there
a few times during the day
and I was surprised to see
how many people were in there
in the middle of the day
I was like
don't know
aren't these people
supposed to be working
but maybe that is their work
well be very careful
about the
the time sinker of it
but yeah
if you want to
you and I go together
we'll have a good conversation
on there
but one of the things
you have to figure out
I don't still know
how to do it
but how to exit
which is like
isn't there the
leave quietly button
yeah
no
but like when you and I
are on stage
having a conversation
like
and okay
you and I is harder
but like
you really
if it's just you and I
then it's the usual
human communication
of like
all right
I gotta go
like
but when it's like
four people
you don't want to interrupt
everyone
announced you're leaving
you just have to
I mean
there's a weird dynamic
that I haven't quite figured out
of
the etiquette isn't clear
the etiquette is not clear
well what it
the etiquette on different platforms
and how that changes
is really interesting
you know
how youtube has one etiquette
which is kind of
it's a lot of harshness
is tolerated on youtube
video
comments
twitter seems a bit
harsher than instagram
instagram there's kind
yeah
it seems to be a little nice
people are really nice
on instagram
for the most part
except for those
phishing things
I actually know someone
who had their
quite sizable account
poached by those
copyright
they come in with those like
you violated
copyright thing
there's all sorts of harshness
in there
that if you think about it
in the real world
I like to think about
instagram as if it was the real
world
someone that comes over
is basically saying like
hey
can I hold your wallet
and go into the bank
and I'll get some money out for you
and like
but there's this trust
based on the format it comes in
that it can almost get past your
radar
unless you're suspicious
if
if you took
comments like
you know
you post get a lot of comments
and use it
you just walk past
500 random people on the street
and just listen to what they say
it
like that's ridiculous
I don't have time for that
but the comments somehow
take on this importance
and this relevance
and you feel
we feel obligated
to give them value
right
and so
the online communities
the rules really are different
and they evolve with time
which is fascinating
with clubhouse
it's a new social network
so it's evolving
and people are figuring out
as you go
and the same thing
with podcasting
on video
and like scientific podcasting
this is the cool thing
when I look at
what you've created
I'm learning
I'm thinking like
hmm
that's interesting to do it this way
because like
nobody
I have nobody to copy
not many people to copy
you know what I mean
but you threw out an idea
I'm not going to put it out here now
because I
I don't want to
because knowing you
you'll hold yourself to it
no matter what
but when we talked about
this issue
the challenge of staying
on a particular topic for a while
I mean
you do have some cool stuff
brewing in there
oh no no no
that's separate from this format
and I love your interview format
but
when you told me about that
I got really excited
that you might go forward with
I'm not going to tell your audience
what it is
but I will say this
it is super cool
I would have never thought about it
it's distinctly different
than what I'm doing
or what Lex is currently doing
and if you decide
to do that podcast
I will be your first
and your number one fan
and I know there are going to be millions of other
people interested in that
would be amazing
so if you decide to go forward
with the idea
that would be awesome
I was going to say what it is
but now I'm not going to
because that's even more interesting
I brought up the clubhouse thing
actually in Elon
because I just wanted to
get your thoughts about
something he's said a few times
to me and in general
is that he's under a huge amount of stress
and I'm thinking of
doing a startup
now it kind of
I'm not
thinking about all of this
because I
you know I enjoy podcasts
I enjoy science
but he says that
his life is
basically hell
that's very difficult
he looks happy
but he's probably very good at
he's fulfilled
but the stress levels
the constant
fires that he has to put out
and he says that most people
wouldn't want to be me
and that
basically the
reason he does what he does is
because
there's probably something wrong with him
like it's not a
he can't help it
but do that
it's kind of beautiful
in a kind of
Russian
massacistic way
I just wonder
the stress
I mean I'm sure you can
you can imagine the kind of stress
he's under
because
so it's running three plus companies
and there's constant
and he says that
you know every single meeting
is not about like
should we install a coffee maker
in the
in the kitchen
it's like
you know this rocket
is going to blow up
and I don't
we're all fucked
I don't know what to do
and we have to
you have to fix
you have to fix a real like
big problems that are
and like how do you
oh yeah
how do you deal with that
what do you think about that kind of life
one is there a way to
you know walk through that fire
and two
should you
should you walk through that fire
well I mean
without knowing
I've never met Elon
but certainly
we have
common friends
in you
and in
other people that
he worked with long ago
in the PayPal days
all of whom speak very highly of him
and show
express immense admiration
for the number of things
that he can maintain
I think it's fair to say that
he accomplishes more
before 9 a.m. than
most people do in
in
a decade
it's clear
and that what he does
would dissolve most people
into a puddle of tears
mostly because of this whole thing
about the brain working hard
equates to
thinking about duration path
and outcome
and anticipating outcomes
given A, B, C or D
a lot of
very scripted linear thinking
and prediction
and that is hard
it's stressful
it requires intense
neurochemical output
and he's doing that
for multiple projects
so presumably
he's buffered himself
from the coffee maker issues
and the little tiny issues
but he is it
himself
unless there's something I don't know
he's walking around
in a biological system
he is
that's
allegedly
yes
yeah allegedly
so
and I don't want to reveal too much here
but I have
a common
a co worker
and colleague
through some contract work I do
that
what I can tell you
is that he's accessing
the best resources
in terms of how to optimize
his biology
and
he's thinking about that
not just for himself
but for all of Neuralink
because I think
I'm not trying to dodge the question
but I think
there's the scale of the individual
but then there's the companies
that he's creating
and you've got people there
that
you could imagine
if they're working
at 10% better capacity
or can focus
5% better for
20% of the day
you're looking at a
enormous increase
in productivity
and a reduction
in the time to reach goals
which will
reduce the amount of stress
presumably on Elon
unless he goes and starts
another endeavor
right
so I think
it's
certainly not healthy
for most people
it seems to be
where he gets his dopamine hits
I'm also
really struck by the fact
that he has a family
and he has
you know
he's got kids growing up
and a relationship
and all that
so
it's super impressive
I think that
I don't know how old is Elon
yes
I'm pushing 50
I think 48
so
even more impressive
because
you know
many people who've been at
exceedingly high output
for a decade or more
don't
do well
their system breaks down
well this is what he was
saying he
actually
I mean I don't listen to
all of his interviews
but
on that live
on the clubhouse
he mentioned that
he was kind of worried
it's interesting
he was worried that
like
sometimes
what I think he said is
I'm worried that
at some point
my brain is just going to fail
because of the amount
of load it's under
like how much I have to
think through
throughout the day
like how many
problems you have to think
through
like you know
it's like puzzles
it's constant puzzle solving
I would be concerned about
taking somebody
who's in that regime
and suddenly putting them
into a regime
where they don't have
enough to bite down into
it's like my bulldog Costello
he's happiest
when chewing and tugging
that big old neck of his
and he is just not going to
become a retriever
he's not going to
that he does well
and gets his dopamine hits
from chewing and pulling
and it seems like Ilan has
ended up where he is
by way of his
natural leanings
unless there's a back story
that's
trauma based
or something
and I don't even begin
to think that there is
it seems that he has
he's one of those rare individuals
in history
that has an immense drive
to create in
all these different domains
I'm just saying the obvious here
but it seems like
that's what makes him tick
I mean, you're doing an awful lot too
well, but the problem is
not really
the problem is
about I've been
on the verge of pulling the trigger
on starting a company
which will increase
the workload significantly
and I'm attracted to that
because of a dream I have
but it's a little bit scary
because it can destroy you
in a lot of ways
there's two sources of destruction
so one source
is
I've for the first time
in my life
a few
months ago
I think
have gotten
it feels like such a noob thing to say
but I've gotten some hate
on the internet
no
I know right
but like
I am such an idiot
I'm so naive to
it was super
I had the question
that I guess a lot of people
have when they get hate
on the internet
it's like
mom
why are these people
making up stuff about me
you know
that kind of feeling of like
why why are you saying that
and
and the
the reason I mentioned that is like
well if you go
if you want to go
and start a business
and do
as I think people should
when they start a big
ambitious business
really try to go big
like
what does success look like
in terms of your emotional journey
you're going to have a lot of people who
make up stuff about you
who say
negative
majority hopefully
if you do a good job
will be supportive
and
but there's still going to be
this army of people
and like
that that was scary to me
because of how
much emotional impact
they had on me
well and I also know
a little bit
I have some glimpse into the fact that
you put your heart and soul
into everything you do
you're not a
you're lighthearted about
certain things
but
you're even lighthearted about being
full gas pedal
24 seven
there's kind of this
you know
was it
Laird Hamilton always says
you know the big wave surfers
he always says
you know
bright light dark shadow
and I think
it's that intensity
and when you do that
and then suddenly
people are starting to like
throw some paint
on your picture
you're like
wait hold
you know
you're going max capacity
but I think the company
is an interesting one
because you've talked about
doing this company before
I've been afraid
I just not been pulling trigger
out of fear
because I enjoy this life
this is
I'm starting to interrupt
but it's ultimately
this question of
taking a leap
is like
say you're in academia
like you're at MIT
you're
I really love doing research at MIT
I really love that life
why take a leap out
you know
but I did
because it's been a dream
but now
accidentally along the way
I found this podcasting thing
which is also really fulfilling
and you know
it's like
why take a leap
because you have a huge
lust for life
yeah
I mean that's you
I mean
sometimes when I'm on the internet
and I think is this
you hear about it
like
oh it's addicting
you know
YouTube's addicting all that
actually
sometimes I think
maybe that's true
but a lot of times
I just think
there's so much here
there's a lot of
garbage
but there's so many gems
out there in the world now
it's almost
like
sure how you allocate time is key
but
I
I think you can do it all
yeah
maybe not five more things
yeah yes
but all
yes
and one thing I just had this idea
and this is not grounded
in any scientific paper
but I think the answer might come to you
during this
this torture that you're about to get yourself through
with David
because in those mental states
you're really asking the question
right
you're asking the question
where is my capacity
and
am I even close to my capacity
and if I am
what's
what's of the most value
I think we find the answers to those things
in those nonverbal
nonanalytic states
it just
comes to us
I hope you're right
and I hope it's a
profoundly fulfilling experience
as opposed to one that leads to my demise
but
you have a will right
it goes
it all goes to the
to the hedgehog
yeah exactly
now it all makes sense
Andrew
like we talked about offline
on this podcast
I do hope we
write some stuff together
do some research together
you're
one of the most inspiring scientists
and
speaking of communicating to the world
so
I can't wait to see what you do with the podcast
I'm already a huge fan
I've been telling everybody about it
I can't wait to see you talk to Joe
as well soon
and I can't wait to see
what kind of paper we write together
thanks so much for talking to me
no thank you
that project is going to be a lot of fun
can't wait
and thanks again for having me on
appreciate you brother
thanks for listening to this conversation
with Andrew Huberman
and thank you to our sponsors
masterclass online courses
for
sigmatic mushroom coffee
magic spoon low carb cereal
and better help online therapy
click the sponsor links
to get a discount
and remember
now is the time to sign up to masterclass
if that's something you've been on the fence about
and now
let me leave you with some words
from Woodrow Wilson
we should not only use the brains we have
but all that we can borrow
thank you for listening
and hope to see you next time